The Act Relating t o Compulsory and Free Education , 2075 (2018)
Date of Publication in the Nepal Gazette
2075.6.2 (18 September 2018 )
Act No. 16 of the year 20 75 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Compulsory and Free Education
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions relating to compulsory and free
education, in order to ensure easy and equal access and continuity of all to education, and
to make education universal, useful for life, competitive and qualitative, while f ocusing
education on the building of nation , being committed to socialism based on democratic
values and norms, by implementing, on the ground, the basic human rights of every person
to acquire education and the fundamental right conferred by the Constitut ion;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament .

Chapter -1
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the “Act Relating to
Compulsory and Free Education, 2075 (2018) .”
(2) This Act shall commence at once.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act,
(a) "Compulsory education" means a mandatory provision to regularly study and
complete basic level of stud y by the children of the age prescribed by the
Government of Nepal , upon getting admitted to schools or other alternative
educational institutions.
(b) "Guardian" means the father, mother of a child or the person whose name is
registered at the school as the guardian, and this term also includes his or her
guardian or curator.
(c) "Economically destitute" means the condition of having annual income that
is less than the prescribed limit .
(d) "Basic education" means the school education from grade one to grad e eight.
(e) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the rule s
framed under this Act.
(f) "School with private investment" means a school that is established or
operated with private investment, and this terms also includes any
institutional school existing at the time of the commencement of this Act.
(g) "Free education" means education to be provided by the school or
educational institution without receiving any fee under any heading from the
student or guardian.
(h) "Head tea cher" means the executive chief of a school who fulfils managerial
and administrative responsibilities by taking up leadership of the school, and
this also includes the principal or other person who exercises the executive
authority, who has major responsi bility of the management of the school or
teaching institute.
(i) "Early childhood development and education" means childhood development
and education of the period of one year focusing on overall development of
the children, which is provided for the chi ldren who have completed the age
of four years before stepping into grade one.
(j) "Secondary education" means education from grade nine to grade twelve or
equivalent thereto.
(k) "Mother tongue education" means education provided through any mother
tongue of the Nepali community, which is spoken in Nepal, and this terms
also includes to multi -lingual education based on mother tongue.
(l) "School" means a school with public or private investment, that is operated
upon being established pursuant to the prevailing law, and this term also
refers to any community or institutional school existing under the prevailing
law at the time of the commencement of this Act.
(m) "Student" means a student studying at the school up on being admitted, and
this term also includes a person acquiring education from the programs ,
including non -formal, open, alternative education programs.
(n) "Special education" means education provided in special way and with
certain means for the childr en who have visual impairment, are deaf, have
autism, intellectual disability, hard of hearing or extreme physical disability
or who are in other condition of s imilar nature, by placing them at separate
groups.
(o) "Teacher" means any teacher of a school , and this term also includes the head
teacher.
(p) "Teaching institute" means a school or institute that provides higher
education, and this term also includes an institute that provides non -formal,
alternative or open education.
(q) "Public school" means a school operated with the investment or grant of the
Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level, and this term
also includes a school operated as a community school pursuant to the
prevailing law.
(r) "Public educational trust school" means a welfare school established or
operated under the public educational trust , with non-profit motive.

Chapter -2
Access of Citizen s to Education and Liability of the State
3. Right to get education: (1) Every citizen shall have the right of equal access to
quality education. No one shall be discriminated on any ground to get education.
(2) Every Nepal i community residing in Nepal shall have the right to acquire
education in the mother tongue.
(3) For the purpose s of sub-section (1), every citizen shall have the right to
become literate, to get early childhood development and education, basic education,
secondary education and higher education , pursuant to this Act or the prevailing
(4) Every citizen who has acquired education shall have the right to enter
into, study, research, participate in examinations in and acquire educational
certificate from any school or teaching institute , pursuant to this Act or the
prevailing law.
(5) Every il literate citizen shall have the right to become literate as
prescribed.
(6) Every citizen shall have the right to get higher education according to his
or her qualification, capacity and interest , upon fulfilling the conditions and
standards referred to in the prevailing law.
(7) A citizen with disability shall also have the right to get education by
means of special educatio n.
(8) Citizen who are economically destitute, with disabilit ies and are Dalit
shall have the right to get free higher education.
(9) The children of the martyrs, who have sacrificed their lives in the process
of popular movement, armed struggle, revolution, of the disappeared persons, of
conflict victims, of the wounded, of the persons with disabilities shall have the right
to get special opportunity as prescribed.
(10) Every child shall have the right to get quality education from the
qualified teacher as provided in the prevailing law.
4. Liability of State to provide education: (1) The Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government and Local Level shall have the liability to provide every citizen with
education up to the basic level, and the responsibility to make necessary
arrangement s in this respect.
(2) The State shall have the liability to provide every citizen with education
up to the secondary level.
(3) The Government of Nepal shall make necessary coordination and
leadership , for the purposes of sub -sections (1) and (2) .
5. Duty of the citizen s: (1) Every citizen shall have t he duty to get education of the
basic level.
(2) Every citizen shall have the duty to send his or her children, who are of
the age group of acquiring the basic education, to school regularly.

Chapter -3
Compulsory and Free Education
6. To provide compulsory education: (1) After the commencement of this Act, the
State shall make provisions to provide compulsory education up to the basic level
to every child who has completed four years but not completed thirteen years of age ,
through ever y Local Level.
(2) In addition to the education mentioned in sub-section (1), at least one
year's early childhood development and education shall be provided after the
completion of the age of four years.
(3) The Local Level shall make provision to provide education up to the basic
level safely for the children affected due to other reasons , including a natural
disaster, accident, unexpected incide nt.
7. To get c hildren to be admitted: (1) After the commencement of this Act, the
guardian concerned shall get every child admitted in the class appropriate to his or
her age, at the school which is convenient to him or her.
Explanation: For the purpose s of this Chapter, the expression "school which
is convenient" means t he school which is located at a distance of up to two kilo -
meters generally from the place of residence where the guardian of the concerned
child resides.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing shall bar
the opening of a school at a distance generally within two kilo -meters , having
regard, inter alia, to the geographical condition, density of population and the
number of children of school age.
(3) The guardian shall not separate a child who ha s been admitted to a school
pursuant to sub-section (1) from the school or prevent him or her from going to
school , with the object to deprive him or her of reading and learning, without
completing education up to the basic level.
(4) If the children cannot go to school due to economic, geographical or
physical, mental condition or any other adversity , provisions may be made for their
study at any boarding school as prescribed.
(5) The guardian who does not get the children of school age admitted to
school or who separates the children from school even after getting admission ,
without completing the education of the basic level, may be deprived of receiving
any facility to be provided from the Local Level.
(6) Before making deprivation of the facility pursuant to sub-section (5),
provision shall be made to encourage the guardian concerned to send the children
to school , in making necessary consultation with such a guardian.
8. To acquire education from convenient school: (1) Every child shall have the right
to acquire education up to the basic level or secondary level from the school which
is convenient from the place of residence of his or her guardian.
(2) If no school is available pursuant to sub-section (1) in the case of any
children of the age of acquiring education of the basic level, the Local Level
concerned shall establish school at such place or make alternative provision for such
children to acquire education up to the basic level within three years from the
commenc ement of this Act.
(3) Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the guardian concerned
form getting his or her children admitted to the school of his or her choice or from
acquir ing education by the children concerned upon getting admission to other
school chosen by him or her.
9. Not to refuse to get admission: (1) If the guardian requests to get his or her child
admitted to the school which is convenient to him or her or any other school to
acquire education up to the basic level, the head teacher of such school shall not
refuse to admit, except in the following c ircumstance s:
(a) If such a number of children have been already admitted as
determined for any grade for teaching ,
(b) If he or she has not completed the minimum standard of the grade in
which he or she desires to get admission,
(c) If additional students cannot be admitted due to physical condition of
the school.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1), the children with disabilit ies or who are economically indigent shall be
admitted by the school which is convenient to them.
(3) If any child is to be refused to get admission pursuant to sub-section (1),
the head teacher concerned shall make recommend ation for the admission of such a
child to other appropriate school , if any, situated nearby such a school .
(4) If any child cannot be admitted pursuant to sub-section (3), information
of the reason therefor in writing shall be given to the guardian and be given to the
Ward Office concerned , and such Ward Office shall facilitate in the admission of
such a child at the school situated within the Ward concerned or elsewhere.
(5) If a child cannot be admitted due to the circumstance referred to in clause
(b) of sub-section (1), his or her guardian, if he or she so desires, shall get him or
her admitted at the same grade of the basic level at the same school, the level of
which he or she can complete.
(6) Except for the circumstance set down in this Section, the refusal to admit
the chil dren shall be punishable.
10. Not to expel from school: (1) A child acquiring education of the basic level upon
being admitted to any school may not be expelled from the school.
(2) A child admitted to a school may not be prevented from or deprived of
acquiring basic education or taking examination for the reason that the child has
done any undisciplined act or ha s bad conduct. The school shall provide such a child
with the facility of counse lling service.
(3) If any improvement of any child acquiring educa tion of the basic level
has to be made in the matters including discipline, conduct and study, the head
teacher of the school concerned, upon holding discussion or consultation with the
guardian concerned, shall adopt psycho -social counsel ling or other necessary
alternatives to create the environment for such a child to acquire education of up to
the basic level.
11. To readmit: (1) If any child who has completed the age of five years but not
completed the age of twelve years has not completed the stud y of up to the basic
level for the reason of not being able to get admission to a school or has quit the
school without completing the education of the basic level, the school shall readmit
him or her according to his or her age or level , subject to Section 9.
(2) If it is necessary to get the child admitted pursuant to sub-section (1) up
to the level of other children of the grade to which he or she has been admitted, the
school concerned shall make arrangement for an alternative measure .
12. To transfer: (1) If the school to which any child ren have been admitted has not
obtained approval to impart teaching up to the basic level or such a school has been
merged with another school or the school has to be closed for any reason , the Local
Level concerned shall make provision to transfer the children who have not
completed education of the basic level from such school to another school which is
convenient to them.
(2) The children transferred pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be
readmitted to such a school.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, this
Section shall not prevent the student s referred to in sub -section (1) or their guardian s
from getting admission to any other school of the ir respective choice .
13. To provide transfer certificate: (1) If any child who has not completed education
up to the basic level or his or her guardian makes a request for the transfer
certificate , showing some reason, in order to get admission to any oth er school,
quitting the school where he or she is studying, to acquire such education, the head
teacher concerned shall immediately provide the transfer certificate , setting out the
details of the stud y he or she has completed.
(2) After submission of the transfer certificate referred to in s ub-section (1),
the school which the child has desired to get admission to shall immediately admit
him or her , subject to Section 9.
14. To make provision of alternative education: (1) The children who cannot acqui re
education of the basic level upon studying full time after getting admission to a
school due to unavailability of the school which is convenient to them or any other
reason shall have the right to get alternative education up to such level.
(2) Other pr ovisions relating to alternative education up to the basic level
shall be as prescribed.
15. To provide non -formal and open education: (1) The children who cannot
regularly study upon getting admission to a school may be provided with education
of the secondary level from any non-formal or open school.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make provisions to establish and operate
non-formal and open schools on the basis of necessity for the sake of providing
secondary education through Local Level.
(3) Other pr ovisions relating to non -formal and open school shall be as
prescribed.
16. To provide traditional education: (1) In order to preserve and protect the values,
norms, culture, custom and practice related to education since ancient time and to
continue them by improving them to the tune of the time, children may be provided
with education by operating institutes such as Gurukul , Gumba, Madarsa .
(2) The Gurukul, Gumba or Madarsa to be operated for providing education
referred to in s ub-section (1) shall be registered in the Local Level concerned.
(3) While providing education to the children, the Gurkul, Gumba or
Madarsa to be operated upon being registered pursuant to sub-section (2) shall abide
by such other conditions and standards as determined by the Local Level in
accordance with law and as prescribed.
(4) In addition to the education provided by educational institutes such as
Gurukul, Gumba and Madarsa operated upon being registered pursuant to subsection (2), education shall be provided according to the curriculum determined by
the Government of Nepal.
(5) Other provisions relating to providing traditional education shall be as
prescribed.
17. Provisions relating to technical education: (1) Every citizen who completes the
basic level shall have the right to acquire secondary education or technical education
equivalent to it pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) Other provisions than that set forth in this Section relating to technical
education to be provide d after the basic level shall be pursuant to the prevailing law.
18. Education of children whose guardians are not identified: (1) If there are
children whose guardians are not identified or traced within the t erritorial
jurisdiction of any Local Level, the Local Level concerned shall have the
responsibility for providing such children with education up to the basic level,
making provisions for their study and other matters.
(2) The concerned Ward Committee of the Local Level shall be responsible
for making arrangements for provid ing education pursuant to sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the guardian of
the child concerned is identified or traced, the guardian himself or herself shall take
the responsibility.
(4) Other provisions relating to the studies of the children whose guardians
are not identified shall be as prescribed.
19. To be disqualified: Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, for
the purpose of creating envir onment for compulsorily acquiring basic education by
all the citizens, the person who has not acquire d the basic education shall be deemed
to be disqualified to obtain any of the following opportunities after 1 Baishakh 2085
(14 April 2028):
(a) To enter into the service of the Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government, any governmental service of the Local Level or any
institution that is under the full or partial ownership, grant or control
of the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level,
or to be elected, appointed or nominated to any post of any institution
established in the governmental, non -governmental or private sector,
(b) To incorporate any company, firm, cooperative organization or non -
governmental organization or to become promotor shareholder,
director or member or any office bearer of such a company, firm or
organization .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing
contained in that sub-section shall affect any person who has already complet ed the
age of twelve years or held any post, been elected, nominated or appointed to any
post or has been already in service in such post or the facility already obtained or
enjoyed prior to the commencement of the provision of sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), this sub-section
shall not be applicable to any person who is unable to acquire education because of
weak health, multiple disability or similar other complex situation .
20. Education up to secondary level to be free: (1) Every citizen shall have the right
to acquire free education up to the secondary level from the State.
(2) While acquiring free education, every citizen shall abide by this Act and
the conditions referred to in the other prevailing laws.
(3) Other provisions relating to free education shall be as prescribed.
21. To provide textbooks: (1) The Government of Nepal shall provide the Local Level
with the amount as prescribed for the textbook s to the children of every pub lic
school who acquire education of the basic level or secondary level.
(2) After receiving the amount pursuant to sub-section (1), the Local Level
shall provide the school concerned with the amount for the purchase of the textbooks
before the commencement of an academic session.
(3) After receiving the amount pursuant to sub-section (2), the school shall
purchas e the textbooks, and provide them to the students at the time of admission.
22. To provide educational materials: (1) The Local Level may provide educational
materials , including cop ies, pens to the children who are economically destitute and
admitted to the public school to acquire education up to the basic level.
(2) The Local Level shall make provisions for necessary lab, materials for
extra -curricular activities, sports materials, sports infrastructures, computers and
the access to information technology , as prescribed, for the sake of the public
schools providing education up to the basic level.
(3) Other provisions relating to providing educati onal materials shall be as
prescribed.
23. To provide scholarship: (1) In order to provide education up to the basic level, the
Local Level concerned may provide monthly scholarship as prescribed to the
children belonging to the prescribed communities of t he more backward re gions
than the indicators prescribed in the perspective of human development index or
economically destitute or the family of the citizen having disability.
(2) The scholarship received pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be spent for
the management of educational materials or any other materials that can support in
the learning of the students.
24. To make arrangement for treatment: (1) The Local Level may make
arrangement s relating to health counsel ling for and treatment of the students
studying at the public schools upon coordinating with the health institution s
operated pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) The responsibility to manage free health treatment in the schools of
private investment and public educati onal trust as prescribed shall be vested in the
schools concerned.
25. Provision relating to day breakfast: The Government of Nepal may provide day
breakfast or the expenses of day breakfast through local government for the sake of
continuity in teaching and learning of the children of the prescribed community of
the more backward region than the prescribed indicators in the perspective of human
development index or economically destitute or the citizen having disability.
26. Language of instruction: (1) T he medium of instruction to be provided by the
schools shall be the Nepali language, English language or both the languages or
mother tongue of the Nepal i community concerned.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if a foreigner has
to study compulsory Nepali subject while studying in Nepal, he or she may study
any other language subject instead of this, if he or she so wishes.
27. School with private investment to be service -oriented: (1) Any school with
private investment shall operate early childhood development and education and the
basic education to make it service -oriented and public welfare.
(2) The detailed provisions to make the schools with private investment
service -oriented and public welfare shall be as determined by the Government of
Nepal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, every school
with private investment and school operated under the public educational trust shall
make reservation of the seats to provide free education for the students, as follows,
of total number of students from early childhood development and education up to
grade twelve , on the basis of the number of students of such a school:
(a) At least ten percent by the school which has students up to five
hundred,
(b) At least twelve percent by the school which has students from five
hundred to eight hundred,
(c) At least fifteen percent by the school which has students more than
eight hundred.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the scholarship
which is being provided by any school at the time of the commencement of this Act
must not be reduced.
(5) Qualified and capable children shall be admitted to the seats reserved
pursuant to sub-section (2) on the ground of competition among the groups
prescribed , in accordance with the selection procedures as adopted.
(6) The facilit ies to be provided by the schools with private investment for
the children admitted upon being selected for the reserved seats pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
(7) The students who stud y free of charge upon being selected pursuant to
sub-section (2) to the reserved seats referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed
to apply for the sake of free study or for acquiring scholarship pursuant to the
prevailing law for the grade or level higher than the grade he or she has acquired
free education.

Chapter -4
Education to be Provided in Mother Tongue and Operation of Schools
28. Provisions relating to mother tongue education: (1) Any citizen of every Nepal i
community residing in Nepal shall have the right to acquire education up to the
basic level or secondary level in his or her own mother tongue.
Provided that such education shall be pursuant to the curriculum prescribed
pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) In the case of the education up to secondary level, such community may
establish and operate separate school or teaching institute in order to provide
education referred to in s ub-section (1).
(3) The Government of Nepal may make arrangement to establish and
operate school s or teaching institute s for the sake of providing mother tongue
education.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), Nepal i citizens
may be provided mother tongue education on any particular subj ect according to
their demands in the educational institutes or public schools operated or granted by
the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level.
29. To operate school or teaching institute: (1) The school or teaching institute
referred to in s ub-section (2) of Section 28 shall be operated and managed by the
same community which has established it.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in order to
operate such a teaching institute or school that provides mother tongue education,
the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level may provide a
certain amount of money every year as grant pursuant to the request of such
community.
(3) Provincial Governmen t and Local Level may make additional
arrangement with respect to the provision of mother tongue education according to
local characteristics and neces sity.

Chapter -5
Appropriation of Budget and Grant for Education
30. Appropriation of b udget and grant: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
appropriate grant amount for the purpose of basic and secondary education every
year, out of its budget , to every Local Level on the basis of the number of schools
and students and the result s achieved by the students.
(2) Provincial Government shall appropriate a certain amount of money as
grant every year to every Local Level , out of its budget, for the purpose of education
up to secondary level pursuant to the provincial law.
(3) The Government of Nepal or Provincial Gov ernment shall appropriate
necessary grant amount pursuant to the Federal law or Provincial law for the
teaching institutes operated by the Government of Nepal and Provincial
Government themselves or to which they have provided grant.
(4) The Local Level shall appropriate necessary budget , out of its annual
budget , for the purpose of providing education of the basic level and secondary
level.
(5) While appropriating budget pursuant to sub-section (4), it shall be made
so that public schools providing education of the basic level or secondary level and
every school operated by the Local Level may receive the budget.
31. To support by other person or institution: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this C hapter, in addition to the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government and Local Level, any other person, organization, institution
may also provide any kind of financial support, assistance or grant for a public
school, public educational trust that provid es education of the basic level or
secondary level or to the school established and operated for non -profit motive.
(2) The support, assistance or amount of money referred to in s ub-section (1)
shall be provided through the Local Level or upon obtaining ap proval of the Local
Level.
(3) The procedure s and modes for providing support, assistance or amount
pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be pursuant to the law.
Provided that, before receiving any support, assistance or amount from a
foreign person, institution or government, except a non-Nepali resident, prior
consent of the Ministry of Finance, the Government of Nepal , shall be obtained.

Chapter -6
Offence and Fine
32. Offence and fine: (1) If a person does any of the following act s, he or she shall be
deemed to have committed the offence under this Act :
(a) To refuse to admit a child pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 9 or
not to provide written information pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 9 ,
(b) To expel a child pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 10 or to
prevent or deprive a child from acquiring or of the basic education or
from taking examination pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 10 ,
(c) To refuse to make readmission pursuant to Section 11 or to refuse to
give the transfer certificate pursuant to Section 13,
(d) To do any act contrary to Section 16,
(e) To do any act contrary to Section 27 .
(2) If a person commits the offence referred to in sub-section (1), the
guardian of the child concerned may make a petition to the Judicial Committee of
the Local Level concerned within fifteen days from the commission of such offence.
Explanation : For the purpose s of this Section, "Judicial Committee" means
the Judicial Committee referred to in Article 217 of the Con stitution of Nepal.
(3) If the offence referred to in sub -section (1) is committed, the Judicial
Committee may fine the head teacher concerned as follows:
(a) Up to five thousand rupees for the person who commit s the offence
referred to in clauses (a) and (c),
(b) Up to three thousand rupees for the person who commit s the offence
referred to in clauses (b) and (d),
(c) The amount equal to the claimed amount or fifty thousand ru pees,
whichever is the lesser for the person who commit s the offence
referred to in clause (e).
(4) If any amount has been recovered contrary to Section 27, such amount
shall also be returned to the person concerned.
(5) Appeal may be made to the District Court concerned against a decision
made by the Judicial Committee pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4).

Chapter -7
Miscellaneous Provisions
33. Special rights of citizens with disabilities and Dalit citizens: (1) Citizens who are
blind shall have the right to acquire free education through Braille script and who
are deaf and citizens with voice and speech impair ments shall have the right to
acquire free education through sign language as prescribed.
(2) The Dalit citizens who have disabilities and are indigent shall have
additional special rights pursuant to the prevailing law, in addition to the rights set
forth in this Act, with respect to acquiring education.
(3) Special provisions shall be made for the children who are Dalit, have
disabilities and are indigent economically , and who are out of schools, in order to
get them admitted to the schools and give continuity in their learning.
34. To operate model, specialized and mobile school with facilities : (1) The
Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level may establish and
operate a model school , specialized school or mobile school or similar other special
kind of school.
(2) The school opened or operated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
established with the permission of the Level where it has been opened.
(3) The school opened or operated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall fulfil the
standards prescribed by the prevailing law.
35. Provisions of monitoring , and monitoring indicators: (1) In order to carry out
monitoring for the sake of implementation of this Act, a mechanism shall be
constituted as prescribed.
(2) The Ministry of the Government of Nepal that is responsible the matters
relating to education shall prepare the monitoring indicators for the implementation
of the right to education as provided for in this Act.
(3) The monit oring indicators referred to in sub-section (1) shall be published
for information of the public .
(4) The mechanism referred to in sub-section (1) shall measure as to whether
implement ation has been made according to the monitoring indicators.
(5) Other provisions relating to monitoring mechanism and indicators shall
be as prescribed.
36. To submit report: (1) Every Rural Municipal Executive or Municipal Executive
shall submit a report every year to Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal
Assembly , along with the following details:
(a) The number of public and private schools being operated in the Local
Level concerned and the number of children studying at such schools,
(b) The number of children admitted to schools up to the basic level ,
(c) The n umber of children who have completed education of the basic
level upon being admitted,
(d) The n umber of students who have left schools without completing
education of the basic level in that year even upon being admitted,
(e) The amount appropriated for education of the basic level and
secondary level, and its source,
(f) Other necessary matters.
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sent every year to the
Ministry of the Government of Nepal that is responsible for the matter relating to
education and the Ministry of the Provincial Government that is responsible for the
matter relating to education.
37. To provide details: (1) For the purpose s of this Act, every Local Level shall keep
updat ed details of mother tongue users, Dalits, persons with disabilities and
economically indigent persons residing in its territori al jurisdiction .
(2) The details referred to in s ub-section (1) shall be provided to the Ministry
of the Government of Nepal that is responsible for the ma tter relating to education
and the Ministry of Provincial Government that is responsible for the matter relating
to education and the schools concerned.
38. Partnership or co llaboration to be made : (1) Necessary arrangement may be
made so that partnership or cooperation among the schools and non -governmental
organizations being operated pursuant to the prevailing law and the Local Level
may be executed. For the sake of carrying out functions relating to the improvement
in the school management, development of quality education and increasing
learning achievement of the students,
(2) The implementation of the provisions relating to the partnership and
cooperation pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be carri ed out pursuant to prevailing
39. This Act to govern : The schools and teaching institutes in operat ion at the time of
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been established and
operated pursuant to this Act.
40. Power to f rame Rule s: The Government of Nepal may f rame necessary Rules to
implement this Act.
41. Power to make standard s: (1) The Ministry of the Government of Nepal
responsible for the matter relating to education may make necessary standards
subject to this Act and the Rules framed under this Act.
(2) The standards made pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be made public.