===== SOURCE: Act Relating to Compulsory and Free Education(2075).pdf =====

The Act Relating to Compulsory and Free Education, 2075 (2018)
Date of Publication in the Nepal Gazette
2075.6.2 (18 September 2018)
Act No. 16 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Compulsory and Free Education
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions relating to compulsory and free
education, in order to ensure easy and equal access and continuity of all to education, and
to make education universal, useful for life, competitive and qualitative, while focusing
education on the building of nation, being committed to socialism based on democratic
values and norms, by implementing, on the ground, the basic human rights of every person
to acquire education and the fundamental right conferred by the Constitution;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the “Act Relating to
Compulsory and Free Education, 2075 (2018).”
(2) This Act shall commence at once.
Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act,
"Compulsory education" means a mandatory provision to regularly study and
complete basic level of study by the children of the age prescribed by the
Government of Nepal, upon getting admitted to schools or other alternative
educational institutions.
"Guardian" means the father, mother of a child or the person whose name is
registered at the school as the guardian, and this term also includes his or her
guardian or curator.
"Economically destitute" means the condition of having annual income that
is less than the prescribed limit.
"Basic education" means the school education from grade one to grade eight.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the rules
framed under this Act.
"School with private investment" means a school that is established or
operated with private investment, and this terms also includes any
institutional school existing at the time of the commencement of this Act.
"Free education" means education to be provided by the school or
educational institution without receiving any fee under any heading from the
student or guardian.
"Head teacher" means the executive chief of a school who fulfils managerial
and administrative responsibilities by taking up leadership of the school, and
this also includes the principal or other person who exercises the executive
authority, who has major responsibility of the management of the school or
teaching institute.
"Early childhood development and education" means childhood development
and education of the period of one year focusing on overall development of
the children, which is provided for the children who have completed the age
of four years before stepping into grade one.
"Secondary education" means education from grade nine to grade twelve or
equivalent thereto.
"Mother tongue education" means education provided through any mother
tongue of the Nepali community, which is spoken in Nepal, and this terms
also includes to multi-lingual education based on mother tongue.
"School" means a school with public or private investment, that is operated
upon being established pursuant to the prevailing law, and this term also
refers to any community or institutional school existing under the prevailing
law at the time of the commencement of this Act.
"Student" means a student studying at the school upon being admitted, and
this term also includes a person acquiring education from the programs,
including non-formal, open, alternative education programs.
"Special education" means education provided in special way and with
certain means for the children who have visual impairment, are deaf, have
autism, intellectual disability, hard of hearing or extreme physical disability
or who are in other condition of similar nature, by placing them at separate
groups.
"Teacher" means any teacher of a school, and this term also includes the head
teacher.
"Teaching institute" means a school or institute that provides higher
education, and this term also includes an institute that provides non-formal,
alternative or open education.
"Public school" means a school operated with the investment or grant of the
Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level, and this term
also includes a school operated as a community school pursuant to the
prevailing law.
"Public educational trust school" means a welfare school established or
operated under the public educational trust, with non-profit motive.

Chapter-2
Access of Citizens to Education and Liability of the State
Right to get education: (1) Every citizen shall have the right of equal access to
quality education. No one shall be discriminated on any ground to get education.
(2) Every Nepali community residing in Nepal shall have the right to acquire
education in the mother tongue.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), every citizen shall have the right to
become literate, to get early childhood development and education, basic education,
secondary education and higher education, pursuant to this Act or the prevailing
(4) Every citizen who has acquired education shall have the right to enter
into, study, research, participate in examinations in and acquire educational
certificate from any school or teaching institute, pursuant to this Act or the
prevailing law.
(5) Every illiterate citizen shall have the right to become literate as
prescribed.
(6) Every citizen shall have the right to get higher education according to his
or her qualification, capacity and interest, upon fulfilling the conditions and
standards referred to in the prevailing law.
(7) A citizen with disability shall also have the right to get education by
means of special education.
(8) Citizen who are economically destitute, with disabilities and are Dalit
shall have the right to get free higher education.
(9) The children of the martyrs, who have sacrificed their lives in the process
of popular movement, armed struggle, revolution, of the disappeared persons, of
conflict victims, of the wounded, of the persons with disabilities shall have the right
to get special opportunity as prescribed.
(10) Every child shall have the right to get quality education from the
qualified teacher as provided in the prevailing law.
Liability of State to provide education: (1) The Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government and Local Level shall have the liability to provide every citizen with
education up to the basic level, and the responsibility to make necessary
arrangements in this respect.
(2) The State shall have the liability to provide every citizen with education
up to the secondary level.
(3) The Government of Nepal shall make necessary coordination and
leadership, for the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2).
Duty of the citizens: (1) Every citizen shall have the duty to get education of the
basic level.
(2) Every citizen shall have the duty to send his or her children, who are of
the age group of acquiring the basic education, to school regularly.

Chapter-3
Compulsory and Free Education
To provide compulsory education: (1) After the commencement of this Act, the
State shall make provisions to provide compulsory education up to the basic level
to every child who has completed four years but not completed thirteen years of age,
through every Local Level.
(2) In addition to the education mentioned in sub-section (1), at least one
year's early childhood development and education shall be provided after the
completion of the age of four years.
(3) The Local Level shall make provision to provide education up to the basic
level safely for the children affected due to other reasons, including a natural
disaster, accident, unexpected incident.
To get children to be admitted: (1) After the commencement of this Act, the
guardian concerned shall get every child admitted in the class appropriate to his or
her age, at the school which is convenient to him or her.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression "school which
is convenient" means the school which is located at a distance of up to two kilometers generally from the place of residence where the guardian of the concerned
child resides.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing shall bar
the opening of a school at a distance generally within two kilo-meters, having
regard, inter alia, to the geographical condition, density of population and the
number of children of school age.
(3) The guardian shall not separate a child who has been admitted to a school
pursuant to sub-section (1) from the school or prevent him or her from going to
school, with the object to deprive him or her of reading and learning, without
completing education up to the basic level.
(4) If the children cannot go to school due to economic, geographical or
physical, mental condition or any other adversity, provisions may be made for their
study at any boarding school as prescribed.
(5) The guardian who does not get the children of school age admitted to
school or who separates the children from school even after getting admission,
without completing the education of the basic level, may be deprived of receiving
any facility to be provided from the Local Level.
(6) Before making deprivation of the facility pursuant to sub-section (5),
provision shall be made to encourage the guardian concerned to send the children
to school, in making necessary consultation with such a guardian.
To acquire education from convenient school: (1) Every child shall have the right
to acquire education up to the basic level or secondary level from the school which
is convenient from the place of residence of his or her guardian.
(2) If no school is available pursuant to sub-section (1) in the case of any
children of the age of acquiring education of the basic level, the Local Level
concerned shall establish school at such place or make alternative provision for such
children to acquire education up to the basic level within three years from the
commencement of this Act.
(3) Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the guardian concerned
form getting his or her children admitted to the school of his or her choice or from
acquiring education by the children concerned upon getting admission to other
school chosen by him or her.
Not to refuse to get admission: (1) If the guardian requests to get his or her child
admitted to the school which is convenient to him or her or any other school to
acquire education up to the basic level, the head teacher of such school shall not
refuse to admit, except in the following circumstances:
If such a number of children have been already admitted as
determined for any grade for teaching,
If he or she has not completed the minimum standard of the grade in
which he or she desires to get admission,
If additional students cannot be admitted due to physical condition of
the school.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (1), the children with disabilities or who are economically indigent shall be
admitted by the school which is convenient to them.
(3) If any child is to be refused to get admission pursuant to sub-section (1),
the head teacher concerned shall make recommendation for the admission of such a
child to other appropriate school, if any, situated nearby such a school.
(4) If any child cannot be admitted pursuant to sub-section (3), information
of the reason therefor in writing shall be given to the guardian and be given to the
Ward Office concerned, and such Ward Office shall facilitate in the admission of
such a child at the school situated within the Ward concerned or elsewhere.
(5) If a child cannot be admitted due to the circumstance referred to in clause
(b) of sub-section (1), his or her guardian, if he or she so desires, shall get him or
her admitted at the same grade of the basic level at the same school, the level of
which he or she can complete.
(6) Except for the circumstance set down in this Section, the refusal to admit
the children shall be punishable.
Not to expel from school: (1) A child acquiring education of the basic level upon
being admitted to any school may not be expelled from the school.
(2) A child admitted to a school may not be prevented from or deprived of
acquiring basic education or taking examination for the reason that the child has
done any undisciplined act or has bad conduct. The school shall provide such a child
with the facility of counselling service.
(3) If any improvement of any child acquiring education of the basic level
has to be made in the matters including discipline, conduct and study, the head
teacher of the school concerned, upon holding discussion or consultation with the
guardian concerned, shall adopt psycho-social counselling or other necessary
alternatives to create the environment for such a child to acquire education of up to
the basic level.
To readmit: (1) If any child who has completed the age of five years but not
completed the age of twelve years has not completed the study of up to the basic
level for the reason of not being able to get admission to a school or has quit the
school without completing the education of the basic level, the school shall readmit
him or her according to his or her age or level, subject to Section 9.
(2) If it is necessary to get the child admitted pursuant to sub-section (1) up
to the level of other children of the grade to which he or she has been admitted, the
school concerned shall make arrangement for an alternative measure.
To transfer: (1) If the school to which any children have been admitted has not
obtained approval to impart teaching up to the basic level or such a school has been
merged with another school or the school has to be closed for any reason, the Local
Level concerned shall make provision to transfer the children who have not
completed education of the basic level from such school to another school which is
convenient to them.
(2) The children transferred pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be
readmitted to such a school.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, this
Section shall not prevent the students referred to in sub-section (1) or their guardians
from getting admission to any other school of their respective choice.
To provide transfer certificate: (1) If any child who has not completed education
up to the basic level or his or her guardian makes a request for the transfer
certificate, showing some reason, in order to get admission to any other school,
quitting the school where he or she is studying, to acquire such education, the head
teacher concerned shall immediately provide the transfer certificate, setting out the
details of the study he or she has completed.
(2) After submission of the transfer certificate referred to in sub-section (1),
the school which the child has desired to get admission to shall immediately admit
him or her, subject to Section 9.
To make provision of alternative education: (1) The children who cannot acquire
education of the basic level upon studying full time after getting admission to a
school due to unavailability of the school which is convenient to them or any other
reason shall have the right to get alternative education up to such level.
(2) Other provisions relating to alternative education up to the basic level
shall be as prescribed.
To provide non-formal and open education: (1) The children who cannot
regularly study upon getting admission to a school may be provided with education
of the secondary level from any non-formal or open school.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make provisions to establish and operate
non-formal and open schools on the basis of necessity for the sake of providing
secondary education through Local Level.
(3) Other provisions relating to non-formal and open school shall be as
prescribed.
To provide traditional education: (1) In order to preserve and protect the values,
norms, culture, custom and practice related to education since ancient time and to
continue them by improving them to the tune of the time, children may be provided
with education by operating institutes such as Gurukul, Gumba, Madarsa.
(2) The Gurukul, Gumba or Madarsa to be operated for providing education
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be registered in the Local Level concerned.
(3) While providing education to the children, the Gurkul, Gumba or
Madarsa to be operated upon being registered pursuant to sub-section (2) shall abide
by such other conditions and standards as determined by the Local Level in
accordance with law and as prescribed.
(4) In addition to the education provided by educational institutes such as
Gurukul, Gumba and Madarsa operated upon being registered pursuant to subsection (2), education shall be provided according to the curriculum determined by
the Government of Nepal.
(5) Other provisions relating to providing traditional education shall be as
prescribed.
Provisions relating to technical education: (1) Every citizen who completes the
basic level shall have the right to acquire secondary education or technical education
equivalent to it pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) Other provisions than that set forth in this Section relating to technical
education to be provided after the basic level shall be pursuant to the prevailing law.
Education of children whose guardians are not identified: (1) If there are
children whose guardians are not identified or traced within the territorial
jurisdiction of any Local Level, the Local Level concerned shall have the
responsibility for providing such children with education up to the basic level,
making provisions for their study and other matters.
(2) The concerned Ward Committee of the Local Level shall be responsible
for making arrangements for providing education pursuant to sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the guardian of
the child concerned is identified or traced, the guardian himself or herself shall take
the responsibility.
(4) Other provisions relating to the studies of the children whose guardians
are not identified shall be as prescribed.
To be disqualified: Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, for
the purpose of creating environment for compulsorily acquiring basic education by
all the citizens, the person who has not acquired the basic education shall be deemed
to be disqualified to obtain any of the following opportunities after 1 Baishakh 2085
(14 April 2028):
To enter into the service of the Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government, any governmental service of the Local Level or any
institution that is under the full or partial ownership, grant or control
of the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level,
or to be elected, appointed or nominated to any post of any institution
established in the governmental, non-governmental or private sector,
To incorporate any company, firm, cooperative organization or nongovernmental organization or to become promotor shareholder,
director or member or any office bearer of such a company, firm or
organization.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing
contained in that sub-section shall affect any person who has already completed the
age of twelve years or held any post, been elected, nominated or appointed to any
post or has been already in service in such post or the facility already obtained or
enjoyed prior to the commencement of the provision of sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), this sub-section
shall not be applicable to any person who is unable to acquire education because of
weak health, multiple disability or similar other complex situation.
Education up to secondary level to be free: (1) Every citizen shall have the right
to acquire free education up to the secondary level from the State.
(2) While acquiring free education, every citizen shall abide by this Act and
the conditions referred to in the other prevailing laws.
(3) Other provisions relating to free education shall be as prescribed.
To provide textbooks: (1) The Government of Nepal shall provide the Local Level
with the amount as prescribed for the textbooks to the children of every public
school who acquire education of the basic level or secondary level.
(2) After receiving the amount pursuant to sub-section (1), the Local Level
shall provide the school concerned with the amount for the purchase of the textbooks
before the commencement of an academic session.
(3) After receiving the amount pursuant to sub-section (2), the school shall
purchase the textbooks, and provide them to the students at the time of admission.
To provide educational materials: (1) The Local Level may provide educational
materials, including copies, pens to the children who are economically destitute and
admitted to the public school to acquire education up to the basic level.
(2) The Local Level shall make provisions for necessary lab, materials for
extra-curricular activities, sports materials, sports infrastructures, computers and
the access to information technology, as prescribed, for the sake of the public
schools providing education up to the basic level.
(3) Other provisions relating to providing educational materials shall be as
prescribed.
To provide scholarship: (1) In order to provide education up to the basic level, the
Local Level concerned may provide monthly scholarship as prescribed to the
children belonging to the prescribed communities of the more backward regions
than the indicators prescribed in the perspective of human development index or
economically destitute or the family of the citizen having disability.
(2) The scholarship received pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be spent for
the management of educational materials or any other materials that can support in
the learning of the students.
To make arrangement for treatment: (1) The Local Level may make
arrangements relating to health counselling for and treatment of the students
studying at the public schools upon coordinating with the health institutions
operated pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) The responsibility to manage free health treatment in the schools of
private investment and public educational trust as prescribed shall be vested in the
schools concerned.
Provision relating to day breakfast: The Government of Nepal may provide day
breakfast or the expenses of day breakfast through local government for the sake of
continuity in teaching and learning of the children of the prescribed community of
the more backward region than the prescribed indicators in the perspective of human
development index or economically destitute or the citizen having disability.
Language of instruction: (1) The medium of instruction to be provided by the
schools shall be the Nepali language, English language or both the languages or
mother tongue of the Nepali community concerned.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if a foreigner has
to study compulsory Nepali subject while studying in Nepal, he or she may study
any other language subject instead of this, if he or she so wishes.
School with private investment to be service-oriented: (1) Any school with
private investment shall operate early childhood development and education and the
basic education to make it service-oriented and public welfare.
(2) The detailed provisions to make the schools with private investment
service-oriented and public welfare shall be as determined by the Government of
Nepal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, every school
with private investment and school operated under the public educational trust shall
make reservation of the seats to provide free education for the students, as follows,
of total number of students from early childhood development and education up to
grade twelve, on the basis of the number of students of such a school:
At least ten percent by the school which has students up to five
hundred,
At least twelve percent by the school which has students from five
hundred to eight hundred,
At least fifteen percent by the school which has students more than
eight hundred.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the scholarship
which is being provided by any school at the time of the commencement of this Act
must not be reduced.
(5) Qualified and capable children shall be admitted to the seats reserved
pursuant to sub-section (2) on the ground of competition among the groups
prescribed, in accordance with the selection procedures as adopted.
(6) The facilities to be provided by the schools with private investment for
the children admitted upon being selected for the reserved seats pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
(7) The students who study free of charge upon being selected pursuant to
sub-section (2) to the reserved seats referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed
to apply for the sake of free study or for acquiring scholarship pursuant to the
prevailing law for the grade or level higher than the grade he or she has acquired
free education.

Chapter-4
Education to be Provided in Mother Tongue and Operation of Schools
Provisions relating to mother tongue education: (1) Any citizen of every Nepali
community residing in Nepal shall have the right to acquire education up to the
basic level or secondary level in his or her own mother tongue.
Provided that such education shall be pursuant to the curriculum prescribed
pursuant to the prevailing law.
(2) In the case of the education up to secondary level, such community may
establish and operate separate school or teaching institute in order to provide
education referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The Government of Nepal may make arrangement to establish and
operate schools or teaching institutes for the sake of providing mother tongue
education.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), Nepali citizens
may be provided mother tongue education on any particular subject according to
their demands in the educational institutes or public schools operated or granted by
the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level.
To operate school or teaching institute: (1) The school or teaching institute
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 28 shall be operated and managed by the
same community which has established it.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in order to
operate such a teaching institute or school that provides mother tongue education,
the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level may provide a
certain amount of money every year as grant pursuant to the request of such
community.
(3) Provincial Government and Local Level may make additional
arrangement with respect to the provision of mother tongue education according to
local characteristics and necessity.

Chapter-5
Appropriation of Budget and Grant for Education
Appropriation of budget and grant: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
appropriate grant amount for the purpose of basic and secondary education every
year, out of its budget, to every Local Level on the basis of the number of schools
and students and the results achieved by the students.
(2) Provincial Government shall appropriate a certain amount of money as
grant every year to every Local Level, out of its budget, for the purpose of education
up to secondary level pursuant to the provincial law.
(3) The Government of Nepal or Provincial Government shall appropriate
necessary grant amount pursuant to the Federal law or Provincial law for the
teaching institutes operated by the Government of Nepal and Provincial
Government themselves or to which they have provided grant.
(4) The Local Level shall appropriate necessary budget, out of its annual
budget, for the purpose of providing education of the basic level and secondary
level.
(5) While appropriating budget pursuant to sub-section (4), it shall be made
so that public schools providing education of the basic level or secondary level and
every school operated by the Local Level may receive the budget.
To support by other person or institution: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in addition to the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government and Local Level, any other person, organization, institution
may also provide any kind of financial support, assistance or grant for a public
school, public educational trust that provides education of the basic level or
secondary level or to the school established and operated for non-profit motive.
(2) The support, assistance or amount of money referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be provided through the Local Level or upon obtaining approval of the Local
Level.
(3) The procedures and modes for providing support, assistance or amount
pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be pursuant to the law.
Provided that, before receiving any support, assistance or amount from a
foreign person, institution or government, except a non-Nepali resident, prior
consent of the Ministry of Finance, the Government of Nepal, shall be obtained.

Chapter-6
Offence and Fine
Offence and fine: (1) If a person does any of the following acts, he or she shall be
deemed to have committed the offence under this Act:
To refuse to admit a child pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 9 or
not to provide written information pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 9,
To expel a child pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 10 or to
prevent or deprive a child from acquiring or of the basic education or
from taking examination pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 10,
To refuse to make readmission pursuant to Section 11 or to refuse to
give the transfer certificate pursuant to Section 13,
To do any act contrary to Section 16,
To do any act contrary to Section 27.
(2) If a person commits the offence referred to in sub-section (1), the
guardian of the child concerned may make a petition to the Judicial Committee of
the Local Level concerned within fifteen days from the commission of such offence.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "Judicial Committee" means
the Judicial Committee referred to in Article 217 of the Constitution of Nepal.
(3) If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) is committed, the Judicial
Committee may fine the head teacher concerned as follows:
Up to five thousand rupees for the person who commits the offence
referred to in clauses (a) and (c),
Up to three thousand rupees for the person who commits the offence
referred to in clauses (b) and (d),
The amount equal to the claimed amount or fifty thousand rupees,
whichever is the lesser for the person who commits the offence
referred to in clause (e).
(4) If any amount has been recovered contrary to Section 27, such amount
shall also be returned to the person concerned.
(5) Appeal may be made to the District Court concerned against a decision
made by the Judicial Committee pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4).

Chapter-7
Miscellaneous Provisions
Special rights of citizens with disabilities and Dalit citizens: (1) Citizens who are
blind shall have the right to acquire free education through Braille script and who
are deaf and citizens with voice and speech impairments shall have the right to
acquire free education through sign language as prescribed.
(2) The Dalit citizens who have disabilities and are indigent shall have
additional special rights pursuant to the prevailing law, in addition to the rights set
forth in this Act, with respect to acquiring education.
(3) Special provisions shall be made for the children who are Dalit, have
disabilities and are indigent economically, and who are out of schools, in order to
get them admitted to the schools and give continuity in their learning.
To operate model, specialized and mobile school with facilities: (1) The
Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level may establish and
operate a model school, specialized school or mobile school or similar other special
kind of school.
(2) The school opened or operated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
established with the permission of the Level where it has been opened.
(3) The school opened or operated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall fulfil the
standards prescribed by the prevailing law.
Provisions of monitoring, and monitoring indicators: (1) In order to carry out
monitoring for the sake of implementation of this Act, a mechanism shall be
constituted as prescribed.
(2) The Ministry of the Government of Nepal that is responsible the matters
relating to education shall prepare the monitoring indicators for the implementation
of the right to education as provided for in this Act.
(3) The monitoring indicators referred to in sub-section (1) shall be published
for information of the public.
(4) The mechanism referred to in sub-section (1) shall measure as to whether
implementation has been made according to the monitoring indicators.
(5) Other provisions relating to monitoring mechanism and indicators shall
be as prescribed.
To submit report: (1) Every Rural Municipal Executive or Municipal Executive
shall submit a report every year to Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal
Assembly, along with the following details:
The number of public and private schools being operated in the Local
Level concerned and the number of children studying at such schools,
The number of children admitted to schools up to the basic level,
The number of children who have completed education of the basic
level upon being admitted,
The number of students who have left schools without completing
education of the basic level in that year even upon being admitted,
The amount appropriated for education of the basic level and
secondary level, and its source,
Other necessary matters.
(2) The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sent every year to the
Ministry of the Government of Nepal that is responsible for the matter relating to
education and the Ministry of the Provincial Government that is responsible for the
matter relating to education.
To provide details: (1) For the purposes of this Act, every Local Level shall keep
updated details of mother tongue users, Dalits, persons with disabilities and
economically indigent persons residing in its territorial jurisdiction.
(2) The details referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided to the Ministry
of the Government of Nepal that is responsible for the matter relating to education
and the Ministry of Provincial Government that is responsible for the matter relating
to education and the schools concerned.
Partnership or collaboration to be made: (1) Necessary arrangement may be
made so that partnership or cooperation among the schools and non-governmental
organizations being operated pursuant to the prevailing law and the Local Level
may be executed. For the sake of carrying out functions relating to the improvement
in the school management, development of quality education and increasing
learning achievement of the students,
(2) The implementation of the provisions relating to the partnership and
cooperation pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be carried out pursuant to prevailing
This Act to govern: The schools and teaching institutes in operation at the time of
the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been established and
operated pursuant to this Act.
Power to frame Rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules to
implement this Act.
Power to make standards: (1) The Ministry of the Government of Nepal
responsible for the matter relating to education may make necessary standards
subject to this Act and the Rules framed under this Act.
The standards made pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be made public.

===== SOURCE: Armed-Police-Force-Act-Nepal(2058).pdf =====

Armed Police Force Act, 2058 (2001)
Date of Authentication and
Publication in Nepal Gazette
2058.5.6 (22 Aug. 2001)
Amendment:
Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal
Laws Amendment Act, 2066 (2010)1
2066.10.7 (21 Jan. 2010)
Act Number 3 of the Year 2058 (2001)
An act made to establish and operate the Armed Police Force
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to establish and operate the armed police
force for the protection of life, property and liberty of the people by
maintaining peace and order in Nepal,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Parliament on the First year of
reign of His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called "Armed
Police Force Act, 2058 (2001)."
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
This Act came into force on 15 Jestha 2065, "Prasasti" and the word "Kingdom" has been
deleted.
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this
Act,-
"National Security Council" means National Security Council
pursuant to Article 118 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal,
20632.
"Central Security Committee" means the Central Security
Committee pursuant to Section 7.
"Armed Police Service" means the service under Armed Police
Force formed pursuant to Section 3.
"Armed Police" means a person appointed to the Armed Police
Force.
"Armed Police Officer" means an Armed Police Assistant
Inspector and an Armed Police Officer of superior rank.
"Gazetted Officer" means Armed Police Inspector and an Armed
Police Officer of superior rank.
"Commission" means the Armed Police Service Commission
constituted pursuant to Section 11.
"Authority" means an officer empowered to appoint pursuant to

Section 13.
"Other Police" means police under the Police Act, 2012 (1957)
"Armed Police Special Court" means the Armed Police Special
Court constituted Pursuant to Sections 28 or Section 29.
"Armed Mutiny" means an act to jeopardize the sovereignty,
integrity or the national unity of Nepal with an intention to create
obstacles or overthrow the government or create hurdles into the
functions of Nepal by using arms and ammunition.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed
in Rules framed hereunder.

Chapter-2
Formation and Operation of Armed Police Force
Formation of Armed Police Force: (1) An Armed Police force is,
hereby, formed in Nepal.
(2) The number of posts to be contained in the Armed Police
Force formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by
Government of Nepal.
(3) Armed Police Inspector General shall be the Chief of the
Armed Police Force.
(4) The Headquarters of the Armed Police Force shall be located
in the Kathmandu Valley and offices subordinate thereto shall be as
prescribed.
Oversight, Control and Directives: (1) Government of Nepal shall
have powers to oversee, control over and provide directions to the
armed police.
(2) Government of Nepal may delegate the power conferred on it
pursuant Sub-section (2) to any sub-ordinate officer, as per necessity.
(3) It shall be the duty of armed police to abide by the order and
direction issued by Government of Nepal and the competent authority
as referred to in Sub-section (2).
Amended by Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066.
Administration of the Armed Police: The Armed Police Force shall
be administered by the Armed Police Inspector General and other
prescribed armed police officers subject to this Act and the Rules
framed hereunder and other prevailing laws and directions of
Government of Nepal from time to time.
Operation of Armed Police: (1) Government of Nepal shall operate
the armed police for the purpose of carrying out the following functions:
To control an armed struggle occurred or likely to
occur in any part of Nepal,
To control arm rebellion or separatist activities or
likely to occurred in any part of Nepal,
To control terrorist activities occurred or likely to
occur in any part of Nepal,
To control riots or likely to occur in any part of
Nepal,
To render assistance to the relief of natural
calamities or epidemic occurred or likely to occur
in any part of Nepal,
To relief an abducted person in case where a citizen
of Nepal or any person is abducted or to control
heinous or serious crime if such is committed or a
disorder of serious nature has occurred or likely to
occur in Nepal,
To maintain security in border area of Nepal,
provide assistance in case of external
intervention being under the Nepalese Army,
To provide security for building, structure and
other place of public importance as prescribed by
Government of Nepal,
To provide security to person and prescribed
institutions etcetera as prescribed by Government
of Nepal,
To carry out other functions as referred to in this
Act, Rules framed hereunder or as prescribed by
other prevailing laws,
To carry out other functions as prescribed by
Government of Nepal from time to time.
(2) In cases, Government of Nepal has mobilized armed police in
any part of Nepal, the National Security Council and Central Security
Committee shall be notified at least once a week about the number of
armed police mobilized in that area and the functions and activities
carried out by the armed police.
(3) Government of Nepal may delegate the power conferred to
Government of Nepal pursuant to Sub-section (1) to Special Class
Officer as per necessity.
(4) In cases, the competent authority pursuant to Sub-section (3)
has mobilized armed police in any part of Nepal, Government of Nepal
shall be notified at least once a week about the number of the armed
police mobilized in that area and the functions and activities carried out
by the armed police.
(5) Upon receiving information pursuant to Sub-section (4),
Government of Nepal shall notify into the National Security Council
and Central Security Committee.
Central Security Committee: (1) There shall be a Central Security
Committee consisting of the following Chairperson and members to
provide necessary suggestion to Government of Nepal for the purpose of
Sub-section (1) of Section 6:
Home Minister or State Minister
- Chairperson
Brigadier
(Baladhikrit),
Nepal
- Member
Secretary, Ministry of Defence
- Member
Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs
- Member
Inspector General of Police
- Member
Armed Police Inspector General
- Member
Chief
National
Investigation
Department
- Member
Joint
Secretary,
Ministry
Home Affairs
- Member Secretary
(2) Other concerned officers may be invited in the meeting of the
Central Security Committee, as per necessity.
To be under the Control of Nepal Army: In case, the Nepal Army
is mobilized to maintain peace and order in any part of Nepal, during
the period of mobilization of Nepal Army the armed police of the
concerned place shall be under the control of the Nepal Army.

Chapter-3
Terms and Conditions of Services
Post and Tenure of Service: (1) There shall be an Armed Police
Inspector General and other posts as prescribed in the Armed Police
Service.
(2) The tenure of the Office of Armed Police Inspector General
shall be Four years and the tenure of office of other Gazetted officers
shall be as prescribed, as per necessity.
Filling of Vacancies: Vacancies of the Armed Police Force shall be
filled up as prescribed.
Armed Police Service Commission: (1) There shall be an Armed
Police Service Commission consisting of the following Chairperson and
members to make recommendation to Authority empowered to appoint
for appointment to the post of the Armed Police Services to be filled up
by open competition:
(a) Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission or a member of the
Public Service Commission designated
by him/her
- Chairperson
(b) A person designated by Government
of Nepal from amongst the Special
Class Officer in the service of
Government of Nepal
- Member
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
- Member
(d) Representative (Special class), Nepal
-Member
(e) Armed Police Inspector General
-Member Secretary
(2) The tenure of the Office of the Chairperson and member shall
be Four years and they shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) Remuneration, terms and conditions of services and facilities
of the Chairperson and member of the Commission shall be as
prescribed.
(4) The commission shall make recommendation by examining
appropriateness of candidate by a procedure and on the basis as
prescribed to the authority empowered to appoint for appointment.
(5) The commission shall determine its procedure by itself.
(6) Other functions, duties and powers of the Commission shall
be as prescribed.
(7) The commission may entrust some of its powers, functions
and duties to its member or employee of Government of Nepal on the
condition that same shall be exercised and complied with subject to the
prescribed conditions.
To be Appointed on the Recommendation of the Commission:
Appointment to the post of Armed Police Service to be filled up by
open competition shall be made on the recommendation of the
Commission.
Appointing Authority: Gazetted Officer shall be appointed by
Government of Nepal and other armed police shall be appointed by
prescribed officer.
Qualification Required for Candidate: Minimum academic
qualification and other qualification required to be a candidate for the
post of armed police service to be filled up by open competition shall be
as prescribed.
Transfer and Promotion: Transfer and promotion of the Armed
Police Force shall be as prescribed.
To be Transferred: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Chapter, Government of Nepal may, until the commission is
formed, transfer army personnel serving in the Nepal Army and police
personnel serving in other police service to armed police service and
make their placement and their service in the army and police shall be
counted in the armed police service.
(2) Armed police shall not be transferred to the Nepal Army or
other police service and army personnel of Nepal Army and police
personnel of other police service shall not be transferred to the armed
police service after the Commission is constituted.
Oath: Every armed police shall be required to take an oath in the
prescribed format before undertaking the charge.
Retention of Lien: The Armed Police shall continue to have lien over
his/her post in the following circumstances:
Until discharging duties and functions in that post,
Until the period of time allowed for the assumption of charge of
another post (portfolio), on being transferred to that post,
During the period of leave,
During the suspension period,
During the period of discharging the functions prescribed by
Government of Nepal,
During the period of serving in any other post in an acting
capacity.
Departmental Action, Penalties and Appeal: (1) If the armed
police discharges his/her duty carelessly or recklessly or pretends to be
refrained from discharging a duty or is incapable to discharge his/her
duty or breaks discipline or commit any improper conduct as
prescribed or does not discharge the duties pursuant to Section 24 or
commits a crime pursuant to Section 27 or in other conditions
prescribed, such armed police may, according to the degree of offence
be dismissed from service on the condition that he/she shall be
disqualified for governmental service in future; be removed from service
on the condition that he/she shall not be disqualified for governmental
service in future or be awarded other departmental action as prescribed.
(2) The competent authority shall have the power to issue an
order of departmental action against the armed police service.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by
Sub-section (1), the authority to issue an order of departmental action
against the armed police shall be as prescribed.
(4) The competent authority, while issuing an order of penalty
pursuant to Sub-section (2) or (3), shall prepare a memorandum
(Parcha) which shall contain the statement of a charge including the
reasons and grounds for penalties, inquiry made in relation thereto,
opportunity for defence and his/her statement (response) and opinion if
any further inquiry is made; reasons and grounds of unreasonableness of
providing opportunity for defence, if opportunity for a defence is not
provided and shall sign it and include it into the case file.
(5) An appeal against the order of departmental penalty to armed
police shall lie to the prescribed authority.
Power to Suspend: (1) The authority empowered to issue an order of
departmental penalty may suspend up to a prescribed period to the
armed police who is under departmental action pursuant to Section 19.
(2) The authority empowered to issue an order of penalty shall
disarm such armed police before suspension pursuant to Sub-section
(3) The armed police shall ipso facto, be deemed to have been
suspended in the following circumstances:
If the armed police is arrested in the charge of crime
pursuant to Section 27 from the date of such arrest
and if one is not arrested from the date of making
decision to file the case,
If arrested and detained for a criminal charge during
the period of such detention.
(4) If armed police is suspended in relation to governmental
functions or as a result of functions initiated on behalf of Government of
Nepal, he/she shall receive only half of the salary obtainable by him/her
during the period of such suspension.
Provided that, if he/she is absolved of the charge and acquitted,
he/she shall receive salary after deducting half salary if he/she had
received the same during the period of suspension and the full amount
of salary (including the increments of salary, if any). If one is found
guilty, he/she shall not be entitled to receive the remainder of the salary
from the date of suspension.
(5) If armed police is suspended for any reason other than as
referred to in Sub-section (4), he/she shall not be entitled to receive
salary for the period of such suspension.
Saving from Discriminatory Dismissal: While taking departmental
action against armed police, an opportunity to put his/her defense shall
be provided to him/her, specifying a reasonable time for defense beside
in the following conditions:
Who has been convicted by a court in a criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
Who has been convicted to an offence pursuant to Section 27
and imposed a penalty of imprisonment, or
If the authority empowered to impose penalty has established a
memorandum (Parcha) recording the condition that waives
reasonability of providing an opportunity of defense.
No Restriction to Institute Case: If armed police has committed a
crime liable to be established an offence under this Act or other
prevailing laws, such police shall not be deemed to have been caused a
restriction to institute a case pursuant to this Act or other prevailing
laws that a departmental action or penalty pursuant to Section 19 is
awarded to him/her already.
Remuneration, Allowance and other Facilities and other Terms
and Conditions of Service: Remuneration, allowance and other
facilities and other terms and conditions of service of the armed police
shall be as prescribed.

Chapter - 4
Duties and Powers of the Armed Police
Duties and Powers of the Armed Police: (1) The duties and powers
of the armed police shall be as follows:
Every armed police shall be deemed to be on duty
in all the time and shall have to complete his/her
responsibility at any time to the deputed place and
time;
Shall have to abide by the order of a superior rank
of the armed police without delay,
Every armed police should be aware and careful to
the work entrusted to him/her or his/her team,
It shall be the duty of the armed police to carry out
other functions mentioned in this Act or Rules
framed hereunder and other prevailing laws as the
one to be carried out by him/her.
(2) If the armed police officer has a reasonable ground to believe
that an object prohibited by the prevailing laws is kept or a person
involved in a crime is living in a house, place or vehicle of any place
where he/she is deputed, he/she may search such house, place or vehicle
as per the prevailing laws and arresting the person involved in criminal
activities and entrust local other police as soon as possible.
Power of Superior Armed Police: The power conferred to the armed
police by this Act or Rules framed hereunder may be exercised by the
superior armed police senior in the area where he/she has been deputed.
Saving of the act Done in Good Faith: An armed police shall not be
liable of penalty for a result caused while discharging duty or exercising
the power in good faith to be discharged or exercised under this Act or
Rules framed hereunder.

Chapter-5
Crime and Penalty
Crimes on which Imprisonment is a penalty: (1) The armed police
who commits any of the following crimes shall be punished with life
imprisonment including confiscation of entire property:
If he/she involved in armed rebellion,
If carried out or cause to be carried out by writing,
speech or sign or any other means so that such
hatred, enmity or contempt is caused as is likely to
disrupt the sovereignty or territorial integrity, or
integrity of Nepal,
sells
government's
other's
ammunition under his/her custody to others or to
entrust (handover) for any reason to others,
If absconded with arms or ammunition which has
been given to him/her for his/her use or under
his/her custody,
If assists terrorist activities directly or indirectly.
If the information and news relating to security
provides or attempts to provide or encourage to
provide
unauthorized
national
international person, association or group.
(2) An armed police who commit the following offence shall be
punished with imprisonment from Seven years to Twelve years,
If attempts to commit armed rebellion,
If perpetrates a riot in a place where he/she is
deputed or the building, structure or place or office
or any other place to be protected by him/her or
runs away showing timidity when attacked by
assaulter,
If breaks up a house or a place with the objective of
loot or loots of goods in any way or causes a loss
or damage thereto,
(3) An armed police who commits the following offences shall be
punished with imprisonment from Five years to Seven years:
If uses or attempts to use criminal force after
knowing or having reasonable ground to believe
that he/she is a higher ranking armed police or
other competent authority in relation to security
whether or not they are on duty,
If does not inform or give notice as soon as
possible to superior official to him/her or higher
official even after knowing the conspiracy or
attempt of armed rebellion.
If carries out or causes to carry out a work by
writing or speech or form or sign so as to commit
hatred, enmity or contempt likely to disrupt
Government of Nepal or to any function of
Government of Nepal,
detainee
prisoner
under
his/her
responsibility is knowingly let escape or causes to
escape.
(4) The armed police who commits the following offences shall
be punished with imprisonment from Three years to Five years.
If does not abide an order given by the superior
armed police,
If knowingly submits false statement of numbers,
conditions of the person or cash and kinds under
his/her responsibility or command,
If acquires membership of a political organization
or party or takes part in a procession or
demonstration organized with political objective,
If abuses, losses recklessly, disorders or breaks up
arm and ammunition or vehicle or cash or kinds
under his/her responsibility,
If runs away with governmental property or goods
under his/her responsibility,
If takes others property or goods forcefully,
If provides assistance to disrupt religious or social
harmony of the country,
If deserts from the service of Armed Police Force,
If resigns without the permission of the competent
authority empowered to appoint him/her or omits
to discharge the duty of his/her post.

Chapter - 6
Armed Police Special Court and Appeal
Constitution of Armed Police Special Court: (1) In order to initiate
original proceedings and settle a case related to an offence punishable
pursuant to Chapter5, Government of Nepal shall by publishing a
Notification in the Nepal Gazette constitute the Armed Police Special
Court.
(2) The Armed Police Special Court constituted pursuant to Subsection (1) shall be located in Kathmandu valley.
(3) The Armed Police Special Court pursuant to Sub-section (1)
shall consist of three members under the Chairperson of the Special
class officer of Nepal Judicial Service including a gazetted armed police
Officer and an officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs or hereunder.
Arrest and Custody: (1) The armed police against whom a charge has
been made of any offence pursuant to Chapter5 may be arrested by an
order of the superior armed police officer of any designation and be
placed in custody.
(2) Such armed police shall be disarmed before placing into
custody pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) If the armed police has been placed into custody after
arresting, notice thereof shall be given as soon as possible to the Chief
of body in which he/she was deputed and the Armed Police Inspector
General.
Provision relating Collecting Statement and Evidence: (1) The
Armed Police Special Court shall take statement from the accused
concerned with a case and keep it into the case file.
(2) If documentary evidence is to be collected during the course
of the hearing of a case, the Armed Police Special Court may order the
concerned body or Officer to submit such evidence and such body or
officer also shall submit in specified time the documentary evidence
requested for submission.
(3) If a witness is to be examined in the course of the hearing of a
case, the Armed Police Special Court may examine such witness by
issuing summon.
Provided that, if the Armed Police Special Court considers that
unnecessary delay or expense or inconvenience is caused if the witness
to be inquired is called for, the Armed Police Special Court may, order
sending a sealed questions (Banda Sawal) to the Chief District Officer
of the place where the witness and order to forward the same to the
Court.
(4) Other procedure of the Armed Police Special Court shall be
as prescribed.
Period for Disposal of Case: The Armed Police Special Court shall
settle the case generally within Ninety days from the date of collection
of evidence.
Provision concerning Detention and Prison: If the accused is to be
detained in reference to trail by an order of, or imprisoned by the
decision of the Armed Police Special Court, Government of Nepal may
detain in any prison of Nepal.
Appeal: The person who does not satisfy with the decision of the
Armed Police Special Court may appeal to the concerned Court of
Appeal within Thirty Five days.
Co-ordination Committee: (1) In order to harmonize and coordinate the Armed Police and other police organization to maintain
peace and order in Nepal, there shall be a coordination committee in
centre consisting of Inspector General of Police and Armed Police
Inspector General as members and Secretary of the Ministry of Home
Affairs as coordinator.
(2) For the purpose of Sub-section (1), there may be a
coordination Committee in regional and district level consisting official
as prescribed.
(3) The Coordination Committee pursuant to Sub-sections (1)
and (2) shall itself determine its own procedure.
Delegation of Powers: The competent authority may delegate the
power conferred to him/her by this Act or Rules framed hereunder to
the subordinate officer under his/her responsibility.
Power to Frame Rules: Government of Nepal may, in order to
implement the objectives of this Act, frame necessary Rules
Saving: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing laws,
this Act shall prevail over the matters covered in this Act.
(2) The functions done and activities carried out pursuant to the
Armed Police Ordinance 2057 (2001), issued on the 9th day of the
month of Magh, 2057 (22 January 2001) shall be deemed to have been
carried out pursuant to this Act.
Effect of inoperativeness of the Armed Police Ordinance, 2057
(2001): With the Armed Police Ordinance, 2057 (2001) being
inoperative, unless a different intention appears, the inoperativeness
shall not:
revive anything in force or existing at the time at which the
ordinance became inoperativeness;
affect the matter in operation as per the ordinance or anything
duly done or any punishment suffered there under;
affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under the ordinance;
affect any penalty, punishment or forfeiture incurred under the
ordinance;
affect any action or remedy made or taken in respect of any such
right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty or punishment
aforesaid; and any such legal proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced as if the ordinance was in force.

===== SOURCE: Citizenship-Act(2063).pdf =====

NEPAL CITIZENSHIP ACT 2063 (2006)
Date of Authentication and publication
10 Mangsir 2063 (26 Nov 2006)
1. Amended by some Nepalese Acts Amendment Act ,2064
2064.5.9
Act No. 25 of the year 2063 (i.e. 2006)
An Act Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Citizenship:
Preamble: Whereas the sovereignty and state authority is vested on the Nepalese people
as the result of the popular movement;
Whereas, as per the commitment mentioned in 'Declaration of the House of
Representatives 2063 (2006) that Nepalese citizenship were facing difficulties in
acquiring citizenship certificate in the past and based on the political understanding made
on 22 kartik 2063 (Nov 8th 2006),
Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the laws relating to citizenship
regarding acquisition termination and other necessary provisions,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the House of Representatives in the First Year of
the Proclamation of the House of Representatives, 2063 (2006).
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called "Nepal
Citizenship Act 2063 (2006)".
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act:
"Minor" means a person who has not attained the age of 16 years.
(b) "Person" means natural person.
"Prescribed" or " as Prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the
Rules made under this Act.
Acquisition of Nepali Citizenship by descent : (1) A person born at the time
when his/her father or mother is a citizen of Nepal, shall be a citizen of Nepal by
descent.
(2) Whatever may be written in Sub-section (1), a child born out of
wedlock by a Nepali female citizen to a foreign national shall be in accordance
with Section 5, Sub-section (2).
(3) Every child found in the territory of Nepal, whose paternal and maternal
addresses are undetermined, shall be considered a citizen of Nepal by descent until
his/her father or mother are found.
Acquisition of Nepali Citizenship by Birth : (1) Any person born before
2046 Chaitra 31, Bikram Sambat (i.e. 13, April, 1990 A.D.) within the territory of
Nepal and having domiciled permanently in Nepal shall be deemed a citizen of
Nepal by birth.
A person desiring to obtain citizenship certificate pursuant to Subsection (1) shall have to apply before holding of the election for Constituent
Assembly and the procedure for granting of the Citizenship Certificate shall be as
prescribed.
In case a person, due to certain reasons, could not submit his
application within the period specified in Sub-section (1) may apply as prescribed
within two years from the commencement of this Act.
Acquisition of Citizenship by Naturalization: (1) A foreign women
married to a citizen of Nepal desiring to obtain citizenship of Nepal shall have to
submit an application in the prescribed form to the designated officer. On
submitting such application she has to produce the marriage relationship document
with the citizen of Nepal and also evidence to show the initiation of procedure for
renunciation of own's foreign citizenship.
A child born to a Nepali female citizen from marriage with a foreign
citizen in Nepal and having permanent domicile in Nepal may be granted
naturalized citizenship as prescribed, provided the child has not acquired the
citizenship of the foreign country on the basis of the citizenship of his/her father.
A person desiring to acquire naturalized citizenship pursuant to Subsection (2) shall have to submit an application with the following documents to the
designated authority:
Duplicate copy of the citizenship certificate of the mother,
Recommendation
concerned
Municipality
Village
Development Committee certifying the birth and permanent
residency in Nepal,
Evidence to show that foreign citizenship has not been acquired
based on the citizenship of the father.
The Government of Nepal may grant naturalized citizenship as
prescribed to those foreign citizens, who have contributed specially for the
upliftment of science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace, human welfare or
Nepalese industry, finance or social development and have fulfilled the following
conditions or status :
who is able to read and write Nepali or any other language in
practice in Nepal.
who is engaged in any occupation and domiciled in Nepal.
who has renounced or declared such renunciation of the citizenship
of the other country.
who has resided in Nepal for a minimum period of 15 years.
who is a citizen of the country where there is provision of the law or
practice to grant naturalized citizenship to Nepalese.
who bears good moral character
who is mentally fit and healthy.
Whatever may have been written is Sub-section (4), from among the
issues of the person, the child born to the person prior to that person having
acquired citizenship by naturalization may also acquire Nepalese citizenship by
naturalization as prescribed form.
Any person acquiring citizenship by naturalization under this
Section shall take an oath as mentioned in the schedule and awarded the Nepalese
citizen certificate in the prescribed form and such person shall be naturalized
citizen of Nepal from the date of receiving such certificate.
Award of Honorary Nepalese Citizenship: Notwithstanding any thing
mentioned in Section 5, the Government of Nepal may award Honorary Nepalese
Citizenship to any internationally renowned person.
Citizenship in the case of accession of territory: When any part of territory
is integrated with Nepal, persons residing in such acceded territory shall be
considered citizens of Nepal, from the date Government of Nepal publishes a
notification as prescribed in the Nepal Gazette.
Filing of Application to obtain Citizenship Certificate : (1) A
person
attaining the age of 16 years desiring to acquire citizenship of Nepal by descent
pursuant to Section 3, shall have to file an application in the prescribed form along
with copies of the following documents to the designated authority:
Nepalese Citizenship Certificate of descendants of
relatives within three generations from paternal or
maternal or self side.
Provided that , this provision shall not be applicable to
Nepalese female citizen married to a foreigner.
Recommendation from the concerned Village Development
or Municipality certifying the place of birth and relationship.
A person attaining the age of 16 years desiring to acquire Nepalese
Citizenship Certificate by virtue of birth pursuant to Section 4 shall have to file an
application in the prescribed form along with copies of the following documents to
the designated authority.
Recommendation from the concerned Village Development
Committee or Municipality certifying the birth in Nepal and
residing permanently in Nepal.
An evidence showing Land Ownership Certificate in the
name of self or family or Certificate of Land Tilling Right or
proof of house or listing of name or the name of father or
mother in the Voters' list prepared by the Election
Commission.
(3) On receipt of the applications pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2), the
designated authority shall award the Nepalese Citizenship Certificate, after
evaluating and based on evidence as produced.
In the circumstance, where a person could not submit the evidences
along with the application as prescribed in Sub-section (1) and (2), the designated
authority may award the Nepalese Citizenship Certificate based on the spot
investigation and on the basis of identification at the time of spot investigation by
at least three persons having obtained Nepalese Citizenship Certificate and
residing in the same Ward and are acquainted with the applicant.
While conducting the spot investigating in accordance with Subsection (iv), the applicant must have been born in Nepal and stated clearly the fact
of having lived in a permanent manner.
On investigation and evaluation pursuant to Sub-section (3) or (4), if
any applicant is not found have been qualified to be awarded the Nepalese
Citizenship Certificate, one shall be duly notified of the decision within the
prescribed period.
Authority to issue Citizenship Certificate : The authority to issue Nepalese
Citizenship Certificate by descent, on the basis of birth or by naturalization, shall
be vested on the designated authority.
Termination of Nepalese Citizenship (1) Any
citizen
Nepal
voluntarily acquires the citizenship of any foreign country shall automatically lose
the citizenship of Nepal.
The designated authority shall register the notice submitted by a
citizen of Nepal, who notifies in the prescribed form of renunciation of the
Citizenship of Nepal and the citizenship of that person shall be terminated from
the date such notice has been duly registered.
Any person who has been divested of Nepalese citizenship pursuant
to Section 14, shall be deemed to have lost his citizenship from that date.
If any person who is in a status of acquiring the citizenships of Nepal
and a foreign country concurrently, such person shall have to choose the
citizenship of any one country within two years after attaining the age of 16 years.
Failure to choose the citizenship in this manner shall be deemed for that person to
have lost his Nepalese citizenship on expiry of that specified period.
In case any question arises as to whether a Nepalese citizen has acquired a
foreign citizenship or not, the designated authority shall make his
decision pursuant to the prevailing laws.
Re-acquisition of Nepalese Citizenship : Any Citizen of Nepal who has
acquired foreign citizenship returns to reside in Nepal and submits a notification to
the designated authority the evidence of renunciation of foreign citizenship shall
be reinstated the Nepalese citizenship from the date of registering such evidence.
Revocation of Citizenship Certificate : The designated authority shall
revoke such Citizenship Certificate of any Nepalese citizen, if it is proven that
such citizenship had been obtained on submission of false documentation.
Two Citizenship Certificates not to be acquired: No person shall acquire
more that one citizenship certificate.
Provided that, there shall be no objection to issue another citizenship certificate by
the concerned office on the basis of change of residency, if any person so desires,
after due withdrawal of the first issued citizenship certificate.
Deprivation from Nepalese Citizenship. (1) The Government of Nepal may
issue directives to cancel the Nepalese Citizenship Certificate and to divest
Nepalese citizenship of any foreign person who has been found proven to have
fraudulently acquired Nepalese citizenship on submission of false documents
and declaration.
Any person whose Nepalese Citizenship has been divested by a
directive issued by the Government of Nepal in accordance with this section may
file an appeal to the concerned Appellate Court within thirty-five days.
Records of Citizenship Certificates to be maintained: The system of
maintaining the records of Nepalese Citizenship Certificates shall be as
prescribed.
Rights. duties and liabilities not to absolve : No citizen of Nepal whose
citizenship in terminated for any reason, shall not be deemed to have been
absolved of the rights, duties and liabilities incurred in relation to any act done
during the period the person was a citizen of Nepal, only by reason of termination
of the citizenship.
Correction of the Particulars : ∇ (1) Any person desiring to correct his/her
caste or age for being differently mentioned in the academic certificate to that of the
citizenship certificate or correct the minor mistakes in the citizenship certificate
,shall have to provide for an application with necessary evidence to the designated
authority.
Clarification : For the purpose of this section 'minor' mistake means the non
substantial details the citizenship certificate to mean 'Kumari' "Devi" "bahadur"
∇ Amended by some Nepalese Acts Amendment Act ,2064
"Prasad" like words being added or not mentioned or difference in 'Aakar or Ikar
(speccific grammatical error in devanagari) or other minor mistake of that type.
The designated authority on receipt of the application pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall conduct an enquiry with witnesses as necessary and together
with evidences obtained from such person shall make the due correction and may
grant another citizenship certificate after withdrawing the citizenship certificate
awarded previously.
The designated authority on receipt of the application by a married
or divorced woman for amendment of her family name, address or other
particulars, may after verifying the necessary facts grant another citizenship
certificate with amended family name, address or particulars and withdraw the
previous citizenship certificate.
Revision : (1)
Notwithstanding anything provided for in this Act, any person
who is aggrieved by a decree issued by a designated authority in accordance
with this Act, may file a petition within thirty five days from the date such decree
was issued with the Government of Nepal for revision of such decree.
On receipt of the petition pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
Government of Nepal may obtain a report from the designated authority issuing
the decree and after reviewing the report may give its verdict or issue a decree and
such verdict or decree shall be final.
Publication of Name list : Every year the names of the persons who have been
divested of Nepalese Citizenship pursuant to Section 14 shall be published in the
Nepal gazette.
Delegation of Authority : (1) The Government of Nepal may delegate the
authority vested on itself pursuant to this Act to any officer in the Government of
Nepal.
Provided that , the authority to divest from Nepalese Citizenship pursuant to

Section 14 shall not be delegated.
The designated authority authorized to distribute Citizenship
Certificates pursuant to this Act may delegate the authority vested on him/her to
any staff officer.
punishment : (1) Any foreign national who claims to be a Nepalese
citizen and acquires Nepalese citizenship by giving false representation shall be
sentenced to imprisonment from one year to five years or fined from fifty thousand
rupees to one hundred thousand rupees or awarded both penalties. The citizenship
acquired by false representation and having penalized pursuant to this clause, the
citizenship thus acquired shall be automatically cancelled.
The person who was involved in the process of verification or
recommendation in granting citizenship to any foreign national on false particulars
shall be sentenced to imprisonment from six months to three years or fined from
twenty five thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees or awarded both penalties.
Any person who assists and begets false or forged Nepalese
Citizenship Certificate and brings it in use shall be sentenced to imprisonment
from one year to five years or fined from twenty thousand rupees to one hundred
thousand rupees or awarded both penalties.
Any person who alters or makes correction and assists in such
undertaking on the particulars of the original citizenship certificate shall be
sentenced to imprisonment up to three months or fined up to ten thousand rupees
or awarded both penalties.
Any person who furnishes and acquires citizenship certificate on
false representation pursuant to Section 12 or the converted particulars pursuant to

Section 17 is proven to be false or commits and Section to commit any other
offence in violation of this Act or the rules enacted under this Act shall be fined up
to fifteen thousand Rupees.
issuing
authority
Nepalese
Citizenship
Certificate
intentionally or with mala fide intention in violation of this Act and the Rules
enacted under this Act issues Citizenship Certificate or makes changes of the
particulars in the Citizenship Certificate, such authority or employee shall be
subjected to departmental action as per the prevailing laws.
The person who undertakes or assists in any offences punishable
under Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be awarded half the punishment as
mentioned in those Sub-sections.
Appointment of Citizenship Team : (1)
If the Government of Nepal
deems necessary, a Citizenship Certificate Distribution Team may be appointed to
distribute Citizenship Certificates.
The Team appointed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall distribute
citizenship certificates within the directives authorized by the Government of
Nepal.
Power to Frame Rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules
for the fulfillment of the objectives of this Act.
Repeal and Savings: (1) Nepal Citizenship Act. 2020 (1964) is hereby
repealed.
(2) All acts performed or actions taken under the repealed Act pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been performed or undertaken under this

===== SOURCE: Civil-Service-Act(2049).pdf =====

Civil Service Act, 2049 (1993)
Date of Authentification and Publication
2050.2.4 (17 May 1993)
Amendments:
Nepal Health Services Act, 2053 (1997)
2053.11.15
(February 16, 1997)
Civil Service (First Amendment) Act, 2055 (1998) 2055.3.29
(July 13, 1998)
Some Nepal Acts Amendments Act, 2057(2000)
2057.4.26
(August 10, 2000)
Parliament Secretariat Act, 2058 (2001)
2058.8.28
(December 13, 2001)
Civil Service (Second Amendment) Act, 2064 (2007)
2064.4.23
(August 8, 2007)
Act No. 2 of the year 2050 (1993)
An Act Made to Provide for the Constitution, Operation and
Conditions of Service of the Civil Service
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make provisions on the
constitution, operation and conditions of service of the civil service in
order to make the civil service more competent, vigorous, service-oriented
and responsible;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-second
year of the reign of His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.

Chapter 1
Preliminary
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called as
"Civil Service Act, 2049 (1993)".
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: In this Act, unless the subject or the context otherwise
requires :-
"Civil Service" means the civil service constituted pursuant to

Section 3.
"Civil Employee" means any person who is holding a post of
the civil service.
"Authority" means any official with powers to make
appointments pursuant to Section 9.
"Family" means the husband, wife, son, unmarried daughter,
adopted son, unmarried adopted daughter, father, mother or
step mother living together with a Civil employee and whom
he/she himself/herself has to maintain and subsist, and this
term also includes his/her grandfather, grandmother in the
case of a male and unmarried female employee, and her
mother-in-law, father-in-law, in the case of married female●
employee.
"Head of Department" means the prescribed official.
"Head of Office" means the head employee of the prescribed
office.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
"Permanent post" means a post of the civil service which is
pensionable and of which term is not specified.
"Expert post" means a post which has functions, duties and
responsibilities of special nature and requires special
qualifications.
●(h1) "Trade union of civil employees" means the trade union of
the civil employees constituted pursuant to Sub-section (1) of

Section 53.
●(h2) "Authentic trade union of civil employees" means the
authentic trade union of the civil employees constituted
pursuant to Sub-section (3) of Section 53.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as
prescribed in the rules framed under this Act.

Chapter 2
Constitution of Civil Services
▲2A. Central body vis-à-vis Personnel Administration: (1) The
Ministry of General Administration shall, in order to run the
administration of the country, act as the central body in respect of
the constitution, operation and conditions of service of the civil
service and the management and operation of the civil employee.
(2) Any acts pertaining to the administration of the civil
employee, other than the acts mentioned in this Act or the Rules
framed under this Act, shall not be carried out without policy
approval of the Ministry of General Administration.
Constitution of Civil Service: Government of Nepal shall
constitute the civil services as follows:
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
(a) Nepal Economic Planning and Statistics Service;
(b) Nepal Engineering Service;
(c) Nepal Agricultural Service;
(d) Nepal Judicial Service;
•(d1) Nepal Foreign Service;
(e) Nepal Administration Service;
•(e1) Nepal Audit Service;
(f) Nepal Forestry Service;
(g) Nepal Miscellaneous Service;
(h) Nepal Education Service;
(i) ♦-----------------------
(j) ♥-----------------------
Class: (1) There shall be the following classes in the civil service:
Gazetted
Non-gazetted
Special
First
First
Second
Second
Third
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
Omitted by Parliament Secretariat Act, 2058(2001).
Omitted by Nepal Health Services Act, 2053 (1997).
Amended by the Second Amendment.
(2) If any employee working in the classless post intends to
be affiliated with the class at the time of commencement of this
Section, the employee may be affiliated as prescribed with the Nongazetted fifth class.
•4A. Special provision relating to integrated civil service system:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 4, the Government
of Nepal shall commence the integrated civil service system by
converting classes of the civil service into the layer system from
such date as may be appointed by a Notification in the Nepal
Gazette.
Posts of Service: (1)There shall be technical and administrative
posts including the expert post in different classes of the civil
service.
(2) In addition to those mentioned in Sub-section (1), there
may also be classless posts, as prescribed, in the Civil service.
(3) ---------
•5A. Job description: (1) Based on the job description of the
organization approved by the Government of Nepal, the concerned
Secretary, Head of Department and Head of Office must prepare and
enforce the job description of each civil post. Such job description
must clearly specify, inter alia, the functions, duties, responsibilities
and powers of such post and qualifications for the same.
(2) In posting the civil employee to any post, the job
description and the indicators for the evaluation of functions as
specified in the job description must also be provided, along with
the posting letter.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
Omitted by the Second Amendment.
(3) Other provisions relating to the job description shall be as
prescribed.
Groups and sub-groups: (1) There may also be different groups
and sub-groups, as prescribed, in the civil service.
▲(la) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
there shall not be service, group or sub-group above the gazetted
first class of other service, except in the post of Nepal Judicial
Service and Nepal Audit Service.
(2) The minimum qualifications required for different posts in
the groups and sub-groups of different civil services shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter 3
Fulfillment of Vacancy of Civil Service
▲6A. Creation of positions: (1) The number of positions in the civil
service shall be created as prescribed.
(2) In preparing an organizational structure and creating a
new position in order to establish a new governmental office or
reviewing or altering the currently existing organizational structure
and positions, the concerned Ministry shall carry out an
organizational and management survey, based, inter alia, on the
programme, work-load, job nature and available human resource,
obtain consent of the Ministry of Finance and forward it to the
Ministry of General Administration.
• (2a) Based on the consent obtained pursuant to Sub-section
(2), the Ministry of General Administration shall make its evaluation
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
and submit it to the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers for
approval within Thirty days.
Provided that in the case of an alteration in the organization
structure and position, a report on such alteration in organization
structure and position may be submitted after carry out organization
and management survey.
(3) Any post
fulfilled by creating the position
contravention of Sub-sections (1), (2) and (2a) shall ipso facto
lapse.
Fulfillment of vacancy in civil service: (1) The posts of Gazette
special class of the civil service shall be fulfilled pursuant to Section
19 and following posts shall be fulfilled as follows:
By promotion
By open
competition
evaluation
competency
By internal
competitive
examination
By adjustment of
promotion by
evaluation of
performance and
experience
Classless/
Non-gazetted
fithth class
(b) Non-gazetted
fourth class
(c)Non-gazetted
Amended by the Second Amendment.
third class
(d) Non-gazetted
second class
(e) Non-gazetted
first class
(f) Gazetted third
class
Gazetted
second class
(h) Gazetted first
class
(2) The employees serving in the post of Bahidar or
equivalent thereto of the non-gazetted forth class at the time of
commencement of this Section shall ipso facto be settled into nongazetted third class from the date of commencement of this Section.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Clauses (c) of Subsection (1), if any post of non-gazetted third class is not held by any
civil employee, that post shall ipso facto lapse. If the employee
holding the post of non-gazetted third classes has completed such
service
period
possesses
minimum
educational
qualifications as required for the post to which he/she is to be
promoted, he/she shall ipso facto be promoted to the one class
higher post. The higher class post shall ipso facto be created for
making such promotion; and the lower post shall ipso facto lapse
after such promotion to the higher post.
(4) The Government of Nepal shall specify the classless posts
into those of main workers and assistant workers by a Notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
(5) The posts falling vacant at the time of commencement of
this Section and the classless posts with duties of assistant workers
specified pursuant to Sub-section (4) falling vacant after the
commencement of this Section shall ipso facto lapse. The concerned
office shall inform the Civil Employees Records Office to terminate
such posts. The duties of such posts shall be contracted out to any
person or institution by making a contract with such person or
institution and with specification of the minimum salary.
(6) Out of the posts to be filled up through internal
competitive examination as referred to in Clause (d) of Sub-section
(1), the non-gazetted second class posts shall be filled up through
open competition from amongst the employees who are serving in
non-gazetted third class and classless posts and have obtained
minimum educational qualification and minimum service period .
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), in
order to make inclusive the civil service, forty-five percent posts of
the posts to be fulfilled by open competition shall be set aside and
be filled up by having separate competition between the following
candidates only, by considering the percentage into cent percent:
Women
-Thirty Three Percent
Adiwasi/Janjati
-Twenty Seven Percent
Madhesi
-Twenty Two Percent
Dalit
Nine Percent
Disabled (differently able)-
Five Percent
Backward Area
Four Percent
Explanation:
For the purposes of this Sub-section
"backward area" means Accham, Kalikot,
Jajarkot, Jumla, Dolpa, Bajhang, Bajura,
Mugu and Humla districts.
For the purposes of Clauses (a), (b), (c)
and (d) of this Sub-section, "women,
Adiwasi/Janajati, Madhesi, and Dalit"
means women, Adiwasi/Janajati, Madhesi,
and Dalit who are backward economically
and socially.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the posts of the percentage determined pursuant to Clause
(e) of Sub-section (7) shall be filled up through competitive
examination between such disabled only as may be specified for any
specific nature of work.
(9) While determining the percent pursuant to Sub-section
(7), if there is a fraction that is less than One percent, the fraction
shall continue to pass on to the immediately next group of the group
in respect of which such fraction has resulted.
(10) If no appropriate candidate is available from the
advertisement for a post set aside pursuant to Sub-section (7) in the
year of advertisement, such post shall be included in the
advertisement of next year, and if any appropriate candidate is not
available even upon such advertisement, such post shall be included
in the posts to be filled up through the open competition in that year.
(11) The provisions for the fulfillment of posts through the
percent determined pursuant to Sub-section (7) shall be reviewed in
every Ten years.
(12) If there arises any dispute on the determination of posts
as per the percent as referred to in Sub-section (7), the decision
made by the Public Service Commission shall be final.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Government of Nepal may, by a Notification in the
Nepal Gazette, specify the post that can be competed only be women
for any specific nature of function or post.
(14) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, permanent appointment may be made by way of a
competitive examination, between such women candidates only,
specified by the Public Service Commission to the prescribed post
for one time after the commencement of this Section as have
obtained necessary minimum qualification for any post and have
worked for at least five years temporarily in the permanent post of
the women development program operated by a governmental body.
(15) The posts to be filled up through the adjustment of work
performance and experience pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be
adjusted on the basis of seniority from amongst the employees who
are promoted as per Section 24D1.
(16) The minimum qualification required for the post of
gazetted second and first class to be filled up through open
competition pursuant to Clauses (f) and (g) of Sub-section (1) shall
be Master’s Degree obtained on the concerned subject and
experience of Five years in the case of gazetted second class and
that of Seven years in the case of gazetted first class, in an officer
level post of any government service or a body corporate registered
as per the prevailing law or an international association or
institution.
Provided that, the term of work experience shall be less by
Two years in the case of a candidate who has done Ph.D.
(17) Other provisions relating to the fulfillment of vacancies
in the civil service and fulfillment of expert posts shall be as
prescribed.
7A. Provisions on requisition for vacancy fulfillment: (1) If any
post of the civil service falls vacant in any manner, the concerned
body shall give information thereof to the Public Service
Commission within one month after such vacancy. Departmental
action shall be taken against the office-bearer who fails to give such
information within that period.
(2) Upon receiving the requisition for the fulfillment of
vacancies pursuant to Sub-section (1), the details of the such posts
shall be published within the month of Shrawan every year, as
prescribed.
(3) In making requisition for the fulfillment of vacancies in
the civil service, requisition may be made, specifying the posts
already fallen vacant by that period and the posts that are to fall
vacant by way of retirement and promotion within the running fiscal
year.
(4) Other provisions relating to the requisition for vacancy
fulfillment shall be as prescribed.
▲7B. Restriction on vacancy fulfillment: (1) No post of the civil
service shall be fulfilled in any manner other than that provided for
in this Act.
(2) No salary shall be provided without having a salary report
passed
Civil
Employee
Records
Office
(Nijamati
Kitabkhana), in the case of civil employees serving in Ministries,
Secretariats, Commissions and Departments and Offices situated
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
within the Valley, and by the Treasury and Accounts Comptroller
Office concerned, in the case of civil employees of the District
based Offices.
(3) If any employee is appointed in contravention of Subsection (1) or if it is found that salary has been provided without
having the salary report passed pursuant to Sub-section (2), the
salary, allowances and amounts for other facilities received by such
employee shall be realized from the appointing and salary providing
office-bearer as government dues.
Provided that, nothing in this Sub-section shall be deemed to
preclude the provision of salary to a employee holding a redundant
post (Phajil).
Explanation: For the purposes of this Sub-section "employee
holding a redundant post" means an employee whose
organization or position has been repealed but his or her
service is yet to be adjusted in another organization or
service.
▲7C. Restriction on appointment on wages or contract: (1) After
the commencement of this Act, no one shall appoint any person on
wages or contract for any job to be performed by the civil employee.
(2) If any one appoints any person in contravention of Subsection (1), the salary, allowances and amounts for other facilities
received by that person so appointed shall be realized from the
appointing office-bearer as government dues.
Appointment
recommendation
Public
Service
Commission: (1) Appointment to the post required to be fulfilled
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
by open competition or internal competition --------- shall be
made on recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
appointment to the post of gazetted second class or above, in the
Nepal Judicial Service, which is required to be fulfilled by internal
competition ---------shall be made on recommendation of the
Judicial Service Commission.
Appointment to the post of civil service: (1) Government of
Nepal shall make appointment to the gazetted post of the civil
service; and a Notification of such appointment shall be published in
the Nepal Gazette.
(2) The Head of Department may make appointment to the
nongazetted post of the civil service.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (2),
the Head of Office may make appointment to the non-gazetted and
classless post in his/her office and subordinated office.
10. Disqualifications for being candidate: (1) The following
persons shall not be qualified to be candidate for the post of the civil
service:
In the case of non-gazetted and classless post,
those who have not completed the age of
Eighteen years,
In the case of gazetted post, those who have not
completed the age of Twenty One years,
In the case of male and female candidates, those
who have already completed the age of Thirty
Five years and that of Forty years, respectively,
Omitted by the Second Amendment
Amended by the First Amendment.
Provided that,
Any person who has not crossed the age
of Forty years may be a candidate for such
post of the civil service .......... as may
be specified for appointment of an exarmy or police thereto.
(2) Any person who has not crossed the age
of Forty Five years may be a candidate for
the open competition of gazetted second
and first class.
The age bar shall not be applicable in the
case of permanent incumbent employees
of the civil service.
Those who have been dismissed from service,
with being disqualified for government service
in the future,
Those who are non-Nepalese citizens,
Those who have been convicted by the court of a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude.
(2) In the case of the female civil employee who has been
temporarily appointed to any post of development side or
development project of Government of Nepal and serving
continuously since at least Five years ago, the age bar shall not be
applicable to her to become a candidate in the advertisement of the
Public Service Commission for open competition.
Deleted by the Second Amendment
Amended by the Second Amendment.
11. Provisions relating to temporary appointment: (1) The Public
Service Commission shall, for the purpose of making temporary
appointments, publish a separate list arranged in order of merit from
amongst those candidates who have attended the examination
conducted by it but have not been recommended for permanent
appointment.
(2) If any temporary appointment is to be made to any vacant
post of the civil service, the concerned Ministry must write to the
Public Service Commission.
(3) The Public Service Commission shall, if so written to it
pursuant to Sub-section (2), recommend the person included in the
list arranged in order of merit for temporary appointment on the
basis of the requisition of the concerned Ministry.
(4) The concerned Ministry shall temporarily appoint the
person recommended pursuant to Sub-section (3) for a period not
exceeding six months.
(5) The concerned Ministry must give information of
temporary appointment made pursuant to Sub-section (4) to the
Ministry of General Administration within seven days.
(6) If any one makes temporary appointment in contravention
of this Section, the salary, allowances and amounts for other
facilities earned and received by the civil employee so appointed
shall be realized from the appointing office-bearer as government
dues.
12. Retention of lien: The civil employee shall continue to have lien
over his/her post in the following circumstances:
As long as he/she continues to function in that post;
Amended by the First Amendment.
Until the period of time allowed for the assumption of charge
of another post, on being transferred to that post;
While he/she is on leave;
While he/she is under suspension;
While he/she is deputed by Government of Nepal on
governmental or non-governmental business or while he/she
is serving in any other post in an acting capacity.
13. Acting assignment: (1) If the post of any Head of Department or
Head of Office falls vacant or the employee holding such post goes
on leave for a period exceeding Fifteen days or becomes subject to
action pursuant to the prevailing law, a civil employee of the same
grade or of one class lower post who has already become a potential
candidate for promotion may be assigned to act in that post for a
maximum period of Six months, in order to perform the functions of
that post for the time being. In cases where anyone has been so
assigned to act in any post, that person or any other person shall not
be again assigned to act in that post.
(2) If any employee is assigned as acting in contravention of
Sub-section (1), the salary, allowances and amounts for other
facilities earned and received by such employee during his/her
holding of that post shall be realized as government dues from the
office-bearer assigning him/her as acting.
Oath: Each civil employee must, before assuming his/her office
after being appointed for the first time, swear an oath as prescribed.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
15. Posting of civil employee: (1) The posting of a civil employee
shall be made based on his/her educational qualifications, training
and experience.
Provided that, the placement in the post of gazetted first class
or the Head of Department shall be made with the consent of the
Ministry of General Administration. In giving such consent for the
placement in such post, the Ministry of General Administration
shall, in coordination with the concerned Ministry, give the consent
for the placement in the post from amongst the employees who has
leadership capacity, in addition to the said matters.
(2) In posting or transferring any civil employee to the
prescribed Head of Department, Head of Office or another post,
Government of Nepal may make such posting or transfer after
concluding a job performance agreement with the concerned officebearer, subject to the job description corresponding to the
administrative job nature of the functions attached to that post.
(3) In order to work along with the incumbent office-bearer
holding the post of Secretary of special class of Government of
Nepal or post equivalent thereto and the post of Head of Department
of a central body and have hand-over and take-over of charge, a
special post shall, ipso facto, be created for Fifteen days, and
posting shall be made prior to the retirement of the incumbent
office-bearer.
(4) Other provisions relating to posting shall be as prescribed.
16. Probation period: While making fresh appointment to any
permanent post of the civil service, such appointment shall be made
on probation for a period of Six months in the case of a female civil
employee, and one year, in the case of a male civil employee. If
Amended by the Second Amendment.
his/her performance is not satisfactory during the probation period,
his/her appointment may be canceled. The appointment of a civil
employee whose appointment has not been so cancelled shall be
deemed to have ipso facto been confirmed on the expiration of the
probation period.
Provided that, any employee who has already completed the
probation period upon being once appointed permanently to a post in
the civil service is appointed to another post and obtains the
dispatch letters shall not be required to undergo the probation period
again.
Explanation: For the purposes of proviso (3) of Clause (c) of
Sub-section (1) of Section 10 and this Section, "civil Service"
also includes the Parliamentary Service and the Nepal Health
Service.
Tenure of Chief Secretary and Secretary: The tenure of the
Chief Secretary and the Secretary shall be three and Five years,
respectively.
* -------------
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, the term
"Secretary" means a civil employee holding any post of
special class.

Chapter 4
Transfer and Promotion
18. Power to make transfer: (1) The civil employees shall be
transferred as per Sub-section (3) in order to provide them, inter
alia, with experience of different geographical regions of the
The proviso Omitted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
country; and the Authority shall have the powers to make such
transfer.
Provided that,
The Ministry of General Administration shall
transfer the civil employees of one Ministry or
Departments or Offices thereunder to another
Ministry or Departments or Offices thereunder.
The Office of Financial Comptroller General
shall make transfer of the employees of the
accounts group under the administrative service.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, Government of Nepal shall make transfer or posting of the
gazetted special class employees, on recommendation of the
committee chaired by the Minister for General Administration, and
comprising the Chief Secretary of Government of Nepal and the
Secretary at the Ministry of General Administration as its members.
In cases where recommendation is to be made also for the transfer of
the Secretary at the Ministry of General Administration, the
Secretary at the Office of the Prime Minister and Council of
Ministers shall, instead of the Secretary at the Ministry of General
Administration, take part at the meeting of that committee as its
member.
(3) While transferring the civil employee, other than the civil
employee who is holding the post rendering expert service and there
is no post and office relating to his/her service, group or sub-group
any where else at the local level and the special class and gazetted
first class employee, the concerned Authority must make transfer
generally once a year, specifying the period in the transfer letter as
follows, in accordance with the time schedule as prescribed:
Transfer of an employee who has already served
in an office in the geographical region of class
"a" and "b" for a period of at least one and half
year to an office in the geographical region of
class "c" and "d” for at least two years,
Transfer of an employee who has already served
in an office in the geographical region of class
"b" and "c" for a period of at least two years to
an office in the geographical region of class "a"
and "b" for at least two years,
Explanation: For purposes of this Sub-section,
"One year" means a period of continuous
attendance of at least Two Hundred Thirty Three
days.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (3), in
the following circumstances, a civil employee may, prior to the
expiration of the period specified in his/her transfer letter, be
transferred, with the consent of the Ministry of General
Administration:
Where
medical
board
prescribed
Government of Nepal recommends that any civil
employee in service in any place has been
disabled and his/her treatment cannot be done in
that place,
Where special responsibility is to be assigned to
any civil employee,
Where departmental action is to be taken against
any civil employee,
Where it is not appropriate to keep on any civil
employee in the office where he/she is serving,
Where, because of the reduction in any position
of the civil service, an employee serving in that
position becomes redundant (Phajil) and there is
no situation where that employee can be adjusted
even in any other office in the same District,
Where
non-gazetted
classless
civil
employees are to be transferred to such place as
is convenient to their abode or adjacent thereto.
(5) While making transfer pursuant to Sub-section (2), the
civil employee spouses, if both of them are in the government
service, shall, to the extent of availability of vacant posts, be sent to
the same District.
(6) In cases where there is no office in the geographical
region pursuant to Sub-section (3) whereto transfer is to be made
respectively or there is no office with a post of the concerned
service, group or sub-group or the employee serving the post of the
office in the geographical region whereto transfer is to be made has
not completed the prescribed service period, transfer may be made
to an office in the geographical region whereto the employee has to
be transferred thereafter.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no non-gazetted and classless civil employee to be
appointed after the commencement of this Sub-section shall be
transferred to elsewhere until ten years, other than the offices within
the same Zone for which he/she has been recommended by the
Public Service Commission.
(8) If any civil employee is transferred prior to the expiry of
the period as referred to in this Section owing to any circumstance
other than that where departmental action has to be taken, such
amount as prescribed shall be provided to such a civil employee to
make arrangements in the new place except the condition of Clause
(c) of Sub-section (4).
Provided that, in cases where any employee is transferred at
his/her own request or transferred to any institution within the
Kathmandu Valley or to any office within the District headquarters
of the same District, such an amount shall not be provided.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in cases where any employee who is on study leave or is
under ipso facto suspension or is on leave for a period exceeding Six
months or is deputed elsewhere for a period exceeding Three months
or deputed for special works or deputed for any special project
implementation has a lien in a District level office, his/her lien shall
be shifted to a central level body in the special post, with the
consent of the Ministry of General Administration.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-clause (a)
and (c) of Sub-section (3), the Ministry of General Administration
may transfer a civil employee of any Ministry and Department or
Office thereunder to any other Ministry and Department or Office
thereunder.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the non-gazetted or classless employee shall not be
transferred without completion of the duration specified in this
Section except where departmental action is to be taken or a
recommendation is made by the medical board on the ground of
health or an application is made by the employee himself/herself.
(12) The Authority shall take departmental action against the
office-bearer who makes transfer in contravention of this Section;
and the Ministry of General Administration may cancel such
transfer.
(13) Other provisions relating to transfer shall be as
prescribed.
▲18A. Provisions relating to deputation: (1) A civil employee may be
deputed to another place from the Ministry, Secretariat,
Commission, Department or Office where he/she is serving only on
the business of that body. Such deputation shall not be made for a
period exceeding three months a year.
Provided that, deputation may be made on a training,
symposium etc. for a period more than that.
(2) While deputing any civil employee to a body which has
no post of the civil service and to an approved temporary position or
while withdrawing deputation prior to the expiry of the deputation
period, the consent of the Ministry of General Administration must
be obtained. The period of such deputation shall not exceed One
year at a time.
Provided that, the consent of the Ministry of General
Administration is not required for the deputation of the non-gazetted
employee.
•(2a) If any employee has to be deputed on works such as
election, population census, survey and mining and on a commission
of permanent nature for up to One year at a time, the concerned
office shall obtain the consent of the concerned body and the
Ministry of General Administration.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
•(2b) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, no employee serving in the post of the Head of Department or
Head of Office of any office shall be deputed to any other project or
body by having the employee's lien over that post.
•(2c) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Ministry of General Administration may depute the
employee whose lien is in the additional group of the Ministry of
General Administration to serve in any body, similar to his or her
service or group, and the Ministry of General Administration may,
with the consent of the employee serving institution and the
institution receiving the employee on deputation, make interdepartmental deputation of such an employee, for a term not
exceeding Three months, in order to obtain the expert service of any
civil employee.
(3) If any civil employee is deputed in contravention of Subsections (1), (2) and (2a), the salary, allowances and the amounts for
other facilities earned and received by that civil employee so
deputed during that period shall be realized from the deputing
office-bearer as government dues, and •departmental action shall be
taken against such office-bearer.
•(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, at
the time of transfer of the District level offices to the Local Bodies,
Government of Nepal may depute the civil employees serving in
such District level offices.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
•(5) The lien of the employee deputed pursuant to Sub-section
(4) shall be in the Ministry operating the employee’s service, group
or sub-group.
•(6) The employees deputed pursuant to Sub-section (4) may
be eligible to be candidates for promotion to their respective
previous service, group or sub-group and if such employees are nongazetted employees, they may be eligible to be potential candidates
for promotion to be made in the districts where they are serving.
•(7) Other provisions relating to deputation shall be as
prescribed.
18B. Restriction on holding without entrusting responsibility: (1)
No civil employee shall be held without entrusting to him/her the
responsibility attached to his/her post for a period exceeding two
months, except in the following circumstances:
Where he/she is on a long leave,
Where he/she is suspended,
Where he/she is to be retained on the lien post
owing to his/her deputation elsewhere,
(2) If any civil employee is held without entrusting to
him/her the responsibility attached to his/her post in contravention
of Sub-section (1), departmental action shall be taken against the
office-bearer who is obliged to entrust the responsibility to, such
employee and have him/her perform such responsibility.
▲18C. Acts to be completed in time: (1) The concerned body must
complete the act of making adjustment required to be made under
Inserted by the Second Amendment
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
this Act on appointment, transfer, deputation and acting after the
commencement of this Act within two months and give information
thereof to the Ministry of General Administration.
(2) If the concerned body fails to carry out that act within the
period of time referred to in Sub-section (1), the Ministry of General
Administration shall carry out it immediately.
•18D.Additional group: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, there shall be an additional group in the
Ministry of General Administration.
(2) The lien of the civil employees being redundant (Phajil)
in any office of Government of Nepal shall remain in the group as
referred to in Sub-section (1).
(3) While holding any civil employee in the additional group
for a period exceeding Two months, such civil employee shall be so
held in a manner not to be contrary to Section 18B.
(4) Other provisions relating to the additional group shall be
as prescribed.
•18E.Maintenance of records of punishment imposed on civil
employees: (1) The Ministry of General Administration and the
concerned body must maintain the records of punishment imposed
on the civil employees.
(2) The records maintained in accordance with Sub-section
(1) must be taken as the ground while posting as the Head of
Department, promoting, designating as acting, assigning the
responsibility attached to the post of head of any body, making
performance evaluation and providing the civil service prize and
other career development opportunity, during the following period:
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
In the event of censure, during the period of One
year from the date of censure,
In the event of suspension, during that period,
In the event of withholding of promotion, during
the period of such withholding,
In the event of withholding of salary increment,
during the period of such withholding.
•18F. Leadership evaluation: Provisions relating to the evaluation of
leadership of the civil employee of gazetted first class or above shall
be as prescribed.
19. Promotion: (1) While making promotion to the gazetted post of the
other civil services, except the gazetted post of Nepal Judicial
Service, it shall be made on the recommendation of the promotion
committee as referred to in Section 20.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
promotion to the post of gazetted special class shall be made as
follows:
Government of Nepal shall, while making
promotion to the post of Chief Secretary of the
gazetted special class, make promotion by
making selection on the basis of seniority and
work efficiency from amongst the incumbent
Secretaries.
(b) The promotion committee shall, to the extent of
availability, recommend those candidates who
have secured the highest marks on the work
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
performance evaluation, from amongst the
potential candidates, in a number that is three
times higher than the number of vacant posts, for
promotion to the vacant posts of Secretary of
gazetted special class or equivalent thereto; and
Government of Nepal shall promote such
candidate, from amongst the candidates so
recommended, as it may hold appropriate on the
basis of leadership capacity and work efficiency.
• (c) In order for any gazetted first class employee to
be a potential candidate for the post of Secretary
or special class post equivalent thereto, such
employee must also have passed such a high
level management training as prescribed by
Government of Nepal.
Provided that, this provision shall not be
applicable to any promotion to be made within
one year after the commencement of this
Section.
In counting the work performance evaluation
pursuant to Clause (b) for the promotion to the
special class, the work performance evaluation
of such years of minimum service period as
required for promotion shall be counted.
Provided that, while making promotion
within the last day of the month of Kartik of the
year 2064 after the commencement of this
Section, promotion shall be made on the basis of
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
the work performance evaluation of the last
Three
years
women,
Aadibashi/Janjati,
Madhesi, Dalit,
disabled
employees and employees permanently residing
in backward region and that of the last Four
years in the case of the other employees.
Action for promotion shall be carried out twice
in a year, One within the month of Poush and the
other within the month of Ashad month, each
year.
Promotion committee: (1) There shall be a promotion committee
as follows to make recommendation for promotion to the other
gazetted post of the civil service, except for promotion to the
▲gazetted post of Nepal Judicial Service and for promotion from
the non-gazetted post to the gazetted post:
Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission or Member of the Public
Service Commission designated by
him/her
- Chairperson
Member
Public
Service
Commission
designated
Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission
- Member
Chief Secretary
- Member
Expert in the concerned subject
nominated by the Public Service
Commission
- Member
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Secretary at the Ministry of General
Administration
- Member secretary
•(1a) There shall be a promotion committee as follows, to
make recommendation for promotion to the gazetted third class from
the non-gazette first class:
(a) Member
Public
Service
Commission
designated
Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission
- Chairperson
(b) Secretary
Public
Service
Commission
- Member
(c) Secretary at the Ministry of General
Administration
- Member
(d) Expert
concerned
subject
nominated by the Chairperson of the
Public Service Commission
- Member
(e) Secretary at the Ministry relating to
Service,
Group
Sub-group
Gazetted First Class Officer designated
by him/her
- Member-Secretary
•(1b) The secretariat of the promotion committee referred to
in Sub-section (1a) shall be at the Ministry operating the service,
group or sub-group.
(2) There shall be a promotion committee, as prescribed, to
make recommendation for promotion to the non-gazetted post of the
civil service.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
(3) The procedures to be followed by the promotion
committee to make recommendation for promotion of the civil
employees shall be as prescribed.
(4) The promotion committee must, while publishing a
promotion name list, also publish the marks obtained by the
potential candidates who have filled up the forms for promotion.
•(4a) The promotion committee shall publish the results of
promotion within four months from the last date of submission of
application forms.
▲(5) The promotion committee must prepare an annual plan
of operations and carry out its functions as per that plan.
▲20A.Special provisions relating to promotion: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if any civil employee of
the gazetted first class or below than that holding the same post for
at least Fifteen years has One month left to get retirement pursuant
to Section 33, such employee shall be promoted to one class higher
post.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
if any civil employee of the gazetted first class or below than that
holding the same post for at least Fifteen years intends to have
voluntary retirement pursuant to Section 35 and makes an
application therefor, such employee shall be granted retirement by
promoting him/her to One class higher post.
(3) A special post shall ipso facto be created to make
promotion pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2) and that post shall ipso
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
facto lapse upon the retirement of such a civil employee from
service.
•(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, an employee who dies after the completing the period as
referred to in this Section in the same post, the pension and other
facilities payable to one level higher post shall be provided to the
family of such an employee.
•(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, any employees of gazetted first and second class holding
the same post for at least fifteen years wish to take retirement with
promotion, such employees shall be granted retirement by
promoting them to one class higher post.
21. Minimum service period and educational qualifications
required to be candidate for promotion:  (1) In order to be a
candidate for promotion, one must possess the educational
qualifications as prescribed for the post that is One class below the
class of the post to which promotion is made and have completed
the minimum service period as follows:
Three years for a non-gazetted post,
Five years for a gazetted post.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
even though any •women, Adiwasi/Janjati, Madhesi, Dalit, Disable
and permanently residing in the backward area civil employee has a
service period that is the above-mentioned service period less one
year, she shall be a potential candidate for promotion.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
Amended by the First Amendment
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Ineligibility for being potential candidate for promotion:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 21, a civil employee
shall not be eligible to be a potential candidate for promotion in the
following circumstances and during the following period:
In the event of suspension, during the period of suspension,
In the event of withholding of promotion, during the period of
withholding,
In the event of withholding of increment in salary, during the
period of withholding,
During the period of five years after the date of change in the
service or group in the case of an employee who has so
changed the service or group pursuant to Section 26 and after
the change in the service or group in the case of an employee
who has got such a change upon an application made by
himself/herself.
▲22A. Withholding and sanction of promotional appointment: If
any civil employee is suspended or his/her appointment or salary
increment is withheld after he/she has been recommended for
promotion but before he/she gets promotional appointment, his/her
promotional appointment shall then be withheld during the said
period; and in the event of his/her acquittal of the suspension or
after the expire of the period of withholding, he/she shall be granted
appointment and only seniority shall be maintained as if he/she were
not suspended or his/her promotion or salary increment were not
withheld.
♣… … … …
Inserted by the second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Repealed by the First Amendment.
24. Criteria for promotion on ground of work efficiency: (1) The
promotion committee shall recommend a civil employee for
promotion based on the total marks secured for the work efficiency.
(2) In evaluating the work efficiency of the civil employee, a
maximum of 100 marks shall be granted as follows:
For work performance evaluation
-Forty marks
For seniority
- Thirty marks
For educational qualifications
- Twelve marks
service
geographical
region
-Sixteen marks
For training
- Two marks
(3) In calculating the marks for the work performance
evaluation of a potential candidate, the marks shall be calculated
based on the last day of Ashad, and in calculating the other marks,
the marks secured by the deadline for making application for
promotion shall be calculated.
▲24A. Evaluation of work performance: (1) The work performance
evaluation form as prescribed shall be used to evaluate the work
performance of civil employee.
(2) The distribution of the total marks for the work
performance evaluation of civil employee shall be as follows:
(a) Maximum marks that may be
granted by the supervisor
-Twenty
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
marks
Maximum marks that may be
granted by the reviewer
marks
(c) Maximum marks that may be
granted by the review committee
-Five
marks
(3) The supervisor, reviewer and review committee must,
while granting marks for the work performance of a civil employee,
grant marks in accord with the criteria mentioned in this Section and
in the work performance evaluation form.
(4) The work performance evaluation of the gazetted civil
employee shall be carried out on a semi-annual (half yearly) and
annual basis and that of the non-gazetted employee on an annual
basis.
(5) In carrying out the work performance evaluation on a
semi-annual basis pursuant to Sub-section (4), the concerned
gazetted employee must fill up the form in duplicate in the
prescribed format, indicating the specified functions, discharged
functions, functions which could not be completed and reasons for
the same and submit it to the supervisor within Seven days after the
expiry of that period. The supervisor must evaluate the form so
submitted, mention feedbacks to be provided in the specified space
of the form and return a copy to the concerned employee within
another Seven days. The annual work performance evaluation form
must be evaluated based on every work performance evaluation
form filled up on a semi-annual basis. The Authority may take
departmental action against the employee who fails to fill up the
Amended by the Second Amendment.
semi-annual work performance evaluation form in the specified time
and against the supervisor who fails to examine it and provide
feedbacks.
(6) In respect of the work performance evaluation to be
carried out on an annual basis, the concerned Head of Office and
Head of Department must, in the case of the non-gazetted and
classless employee, carry out or cause to be carried out evaluation
within the specified period, prepare it in triplicate, send a copy each
to the Public Service Commission and the promotion committee
secretariat and retain the other copy in the concerned office. In the
case of gazetted civil employee, the Secretary at the concerned
Ministry, Secretariat, Commission or central body must carry out, or
cause to be carried out, evaluation within the specified period,
prepare it in triplicate, send a copy each to the Public Service
Commission and the promotion committee secretariat and retain the
other copy in the concerned Ministry, Secretariat, Commission or
central body. Each body carrying out work performance evaluation
must publish a notice, also containing a name list sent to the body to
which it has to submit the form evaluated by it within the prescribed
period, on the notice board of its office within seven days.
•(6a) Each civil employee must fill up his/her work
performance evaluation form and register it with the concerned
office within the prescribed period of time. If the concerned
employee fails to register it within such period of time and makes an
application, accompanied by reasonable reasons therefor, for the
extension of time limit, the supervisor may, if he/she thinks the
reasons mentioned in the application to be reasonable, extend the
time limit for a period not exceeding fifteen days after the date of
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
expiry of the prescribed period of time. The promotion committee
shall subtract one mark from the total marks for the work
performance evaluation form registered within the extension time of
that fiscal year.
Provided that, if any employee has to go for a foreign
training, workshop or study tour during the period of filling up the
work performance evaluation form, the employee has to fill up the
work performance evaluation form and register it with the
concerned office prior to make such departure. The work
performance evaluation form so registered shall be evaluated as if it
were registered with the specified time.
•(6b) Departmental action shall be taken against the officebearer who does not evaluate, within the prescribed period of time,
the work performance evaluation form filled and registered by the
civil employee in time.
•(6c) If, after the review committee has carried out the annual
work performance evaluation to be carried out each year, the
concerned employee makes an application for information of the
total marks of work performance evaluation that he/she has secured
in that year, the review committee secretariat must give such
information.
Provided that, information of the marks given by the review
committee shall not be given.
•(6d) After receiving information pursuant to Sub-section
(6c), if any employee is not satisfied with the evaluation made by
the supervisor or reviewer may make a complaint, accompanied by
the solid ground and reason for such dissatisfaction, to the
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
prescribed authority within seven days. Where a complaint is so
made, such authority shall conduct necessary investigation, in
consultation with the concerned supervisor and reviewer, and may,
if so required, amend, as prescribed, the marks obtained in such an
evaluation form.
(7) If the supervisor or the reviewer grants more than Ninety
Five per cent or less than Seventy Five per cent marks for the work
performance evaluation to be carried out annually, he/she must set
out clear reasons therefor; and where he/she grants less than Seventy
Five per cent marks, he/she must inform the concerned employee
thereof and submit it to the review committee, along with the
reactions, if any, made by such employee. The review committee
may, if it is not satisfied with the evaluation of the work
performance carried out by the supervisor or the reviewer or by
both, return it, also setting out the clear reasons therefor. In cases
where it is so returned, the concerned evaluator must reevaluate it or
set out justifiable reasons why it is not necessary to amend the
evaluation carried out previously and forward it accordingly.
While
calculating
marks
purposes
performance evaluation, the marks shall be calculated on the basis
of the average figure of the work performance evaluation form of
such last year as the service for which is required to become a
potential candidate for promotion.
Provided that:
(1) Marks due for the work performance evaluation
for the period of training and study undergone or
of the period of suspension where the suspension
of an employee has been released shall be
granted in proportion of the marks secured in the
Amended by the Second Amendment.
year immediately preceding the departure for
such study or training or preceding such
suspension.
(2) The potential candidacy shall be calculated only
by deducting the period of extra-ordinary leave
undergone; and the work performance evaluation
form shall not be filled up for the period of such
leave. The work performance evaluation of the
subsequent period shall be calculated after
deducting the period of extra-ordinary leave
undergone, for the service period of such years
as required to be a potential candidate for
promotion.
(9) -----------------
(10) Other provisions relating to the work performance
evaluation shall be as prescribed.
24B. Evaluation of seniority: While granting to the civil employee
marks for seniority, a maximum of thirty marks shall be granted as
follows:
At the rate of 3.75 marks for each year of service in the post
of non-gazetted third and second class,
At the rate of 3 marks for each year of service in the post of
non-gazetted first class,
At the rate of 2.5 marks for each year of service in the post of
gazetted third and second class.
Provided that-
Deleted by the Second Amendment.
While calculating marks for seniority, marks
shall be calculated on a proportional basis for a
period of more than One year by a few months
or days.
For purposes of this Clause, no marks shall be
granted for the period of absence or extraordinary leave undergone.
24C. Categorization of geographical regions: (1) While granting
marks to the civil employee for his/her experience of work in
different geographical regions, the different geographical regions of
the country shall be classified into four categories viz. 'a', 'b', 'c' and
'd', respectively, and marks shall be granted as follows not in excess
of Sixteen marks for the work experience in one or more categories
thereof:
For the post of non-gazetted third and second
class-
At the rate of 4 marks for each year of
service in category 'a',
At the rate of 3.25 marks for each year of
service in category 'b',
At the rate of 2.50 marks for each year of
service in category 'c',
At the rate of 2 mark for each year of
service in category 'd'.
For the post of non gazetted first class-
At the rate of 4 marks for each year of
service in category 'a',
Amended by the Second Amendment.
At the rate of 3.25 marks for each year of
service in category 'b',
At the rate of 2.50 marks for each year of
service in category 'c',
At the rate of 1.50 mark for each year of
service in category 'd'.
For the post of gazetted third and second class-
At the rate of 4 marks for each year of
service in category 'a',
At the rate of 3.25 marks for each year of
service in category 'b',
At the rate of 2.50 marks for each year of
service in category 'c',
At the rate of 1.25 mark for each year of
service in category 'd'.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
the marks already secured by any civil employee for geographical
region at the time of commencement of this Section shall not
decrease.
(3) For purposes of Sub-section (1), the description of
different geographical regions shall be as prescribed.
(4) No marks of any one geographical region shall be granted
unless and until any employee makes continuous office attendance
for at least Two Hundred Thirty Three days in that region. For a
period more than Two Hundred Thirty Three days, marks of the
same geographical region shall be granted pro rata; and marks
equivalent to that of category 'd' shall be granted for a period less
than that irrespective of the geographical region where the employee
has served. The marks obtainable for the service in geographical
region shall be calculated only if the marks have been obtained in
the post that is one class lower than the class to which promotion is
to be made.
(5) The marks equivalent to that of category 'd' shall be
granted to the civil employee who serves in a Nepalese Diplomatic
Mission or any other office situated aboard and who goes on
deputation for a study leave or foreign training.
▲24D.Evaluation of educational qualifications and training: (1)
While granting marks to the civil employees for educational
qualifications, a lump sum of twelve marks shall be granted for the
minimum educational qualifications required to join any post of the
civil service and additional educational degree, which is higher than
the minimum educational qualifications and in a subject related with
the service, group or sub-group. Both marks shall be granted even if
the employee has obtained only the education qualification that is
higher then the minimum required educational qualification.
Number
Educational Qualification (Title)
First
class
Second
class
Third
class
For the Minimum educational
qualification as required for the
entry of service
For the any one additional
educational qualification or the
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
concerned subject higher than
minimum
educational
qualification for the entry into
service.
(2)  ----------
(3) Except the minimum educational qualification prescribed
for the posts of the gazette second and first classes, to be filled up
through open competition pursuant to Clauses (f) and (g) of Subsection (1) of Section 7, the minimum educational qualification
prescribed for the entry into the gazette third class service shall be
deemed to be the minimum educational qualification also for the
promotion to the posts higher than gazetted second class.
(4) ----------
(5) For the in-service training, 2 marks, 1.75 marks and 1.5
marks shall be granted for the first, second and third division,
respectively.
(6) While granting marks to the civil employee for training,
marks shall be granted for an in-service training of a period of one
month or more, in a subject related with the service. In calculating
marks for the training, the marks shall be calculated only for that
class while in which class he/she has been nominated for the
training.
•Explanation: One month training shall mean a training of a
period of thirty working days or more.
Deleted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
(7) The civil employee shall submit certified copies of the
educational qualifications and the in-service training. No marks
shall be granted therefor if he/she fails to submit them.
•(8) Whether the educational qualification submitted by a
civil employee along with the application for the purpose of
promotion is related with the service, group and sub-group or not
shall be as decided by the equivalency determination committee as
prescribed. If the equivalency of the educational qualification
submitted along with the application for the purpose of promotion is
made prior to a date before the holding of the meeting of the
promotion committee, the marks of such educational qualification
shall be counted for promotion.
•(9) Provisions relating to training institutions and training
standards shall be as prescribed by Ministry of General
Administration, in coordination with the Ministry operating the
service, group and sub-group.
•24D1.Special provision of promotion by evaluation of work
performance and experience: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, the civil employee shall be
promoted up to one class, upon having completed the following
service period in the following class, and obtained the above
educational qualification than prescribed educational qualification at
the earlier time of entry or group division or after the entry or group
division:
Non-gazetted Second Class
Ten years
Non-gazetted First Class
Twelve years
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Gazetted Third Class
Fifteen years
Gazetted Second Class
Eighteen years
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) ,
those civil employees shall be promoted up to one class upon having
completed the service period of Eighteen, Fifteen and Thirteen years
or more in the permanent post of the same class of gazetted third
class, non-gazetted second class and having the educational
qualification and obtained the minimum educational qualification of
the prescribed subject at the time of entry of service or group
division of the concerned service, group or sub-group.
(3) The following conditions shall have to be fulfilled for the
promotion pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2)
Not being subject to action pursuant to Section
Having obtained the marks average of ninety
percent or more in the performance education of
last three years.
(4) There shall be a promotion committee as follows to make
recommendation for promotion pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2)
except the post of gazetted post of Nepal Judicial Service, and the
promotion of gazetted post of Nepal Judicial Service shall be
conducted by the Judicial Commission.
Member
Public
Service
Commission
designated
chairperson of the Public
Service Commission
Chairperson
(b) Secretary at the Ministry or
Institution
where
employee is working
Member
Secretary at the Ministry of
General Administration or
gazetted first class officer of
the ministry designated by
him/her
Member
Explanation: The Secretary of the Office of the Prime
Minister and Council of Ministers will be the member in a
condition of the promotion of the employee of Ministry of
General Administration.
(5) The promotion Committee Secretariat pursuant to Subsection (4) shall be at the Ministry or Institution where the employee
worked as candidate for the promotion.
(6) The special post of concerned service, group, sub-group of
above class ipso facto at the employee working office for the
promotion pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2) and the Civil Employee
Record Office shall register of such post from the date of the
commencement of promotion after the concerned institution provide
promotion.
(7) The position shall ipso facto lapse if the employee is
promoted, pursuant to Sub-section (6), gets retirement by any reason
or is promoted to above post or adjusted to the registered post and
the post shall ipso facto be settled as the earlier post before the post
of his/her promotion, and the Civil Employees Record Office shall
maintain the records of such post accordingly.
(8) The civil employee promoted for the special post pursuant
to Sub-section (6) shall have to conduct work of the post where
he/she work before the promotion except in the case of adjustment
pursuant to Sub-section (7).
Provided that, the seniority of the employee promoted as per
this Section shall be counted as promoted post and shall eligible for
the competition of the above post of above class then promoted
class.
(9) The transfer of the employee promoted as per this Section
shall be with the special post created as per the promotion of this
Section of other institution until the adjustment pursuant to Subsection (7).
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, in cases where the employee of the same class of one office
promoted as per this Section and might be the office chief post, the
senior employee among such class employee worked as office chief.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, the promotion proceeding work performance evaluation shall be
conducted before and then after the recommendation of promotion
according to this Section the conduced except the first time of the
commencement of this Act.
(12) Notwithstanding contained anything elsewhere in this
Section, the promotion provision of this Section shall not commence
for the layer increase.
(13) Notwithstanding any thing contained elsewhere in this
Section, no adverse effect shall be made to the provision of open
competition by promotion pursuant to this Section.
(14) The procedures for inviting applications for promotion
by evaluation of work performance and experience, result
publication and duration, claim of promotion and adjustment of
promoted employees and other relevant provisions shall be as
prescribed.
•24D2.Provision relating to layer upgrade of classless employee:
The layer of the classless post shall be as follows:
First layer,
Second layer,
Third layer,
Fourth layer,
Fifth layer.
(2) The employee who is firstly appointed to the classless
post shall be maintained into the first layer.
(3) The competent authority shall upgrade as follows the
classless employees whose records of punishment have not been
maintained pursuant to Section 18E.
Second layer having the service period of Five
year or more and less than Ten years.
Third layer having the service period of Ten
year or more and less than Fifteen years.
Fourth layer having the service period of Fifteen
year or more and less than Twenty years.
Fifth layer having the service period of Twenty
year or more.
(4) The pay scale of the layer pursuant to Sub-section (3)
shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
(5) The other provisions relating to upgradation shall be as
prescribed.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
24E. Sheet roll/personal details to be maintained: (1) It shall be the
responsibility of the concerned Head of Department or Head of
Office to maintain accurately the sheet roll/personal details of the
civil employee serving in his/her office. It shall be the obligation of
the concerned employee to update, or cause to be updated, his/her
sheet roll/personal details.
(2) If the civil employee who has already been a potential
candidate for promotion fails to submit the application form because
of his/her staying abroad in the course of a governmental business or
study or deputation or occurrence of a natural calamity or
circumstance beyond control, the concerned Head of Department or
Head of Office must forward the details of such employee to the
office publishing a notice for promotion, within the time-limit of the
notice for promotion. The promotion committee shall settle acts of
promotion based on the details so forwarded.
(3) If it is proved that any candidate has mentioned false
details in the promotion application form, departmental action shall
be taken against such candidate.
▲24F. Complaint on promotion: (1) The concerned civil employee,
who is not satisfied with the promotion recommendation made by
the promotion committee pursuant to Section 20, may file a
complaint with the Public Service Commission within Thirty Five
days from the date of such recommendation; and the complaint so
filed shall be settled within Sixty days after the date of expiry of the
time limit for filing complaint.
(2) If, following the settlement of a complaint filed pursuant
to Sub-section (1), the promotion name-list previously published is
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
to be amended, the complaint hearing official shall give a notice
thereof to the promotion committee.
(3) If, while examining a complaint pursuant to Sub-section
(1), it appears that erroneous evaluation has been carried out
knowingly, the Public Service Commission may warn the evaluator.
(4) If a complaint filed pursuant to Sub-section (1) is held to
be false, two marks and three marks of such a complainant shall be
deducted on the promotion to be made following the complaint, for
the complaint made for the first and second time, respectively.
(5) A notice of the action taken pursuant to Sub-section (3) or
(4) must be given to the promotion committee secretariat, the office
where the concerned employee is in service and to the concerned
employee, as well.
(6) Other provisions on complaint on promotion shall be as
prescribed.
Alteration in conditions of promotion: In making any
amendment to Sections 21, 22, 24, 24A, 24B, 24C and 24D or the
Rules framed thereunder, provision shall be made so that such
amendment shall come into force only on a date after One year of
such amendment.
26. Change of service, group or sub-group: If, Government of
Nepal requires an employee with any special qualifications in any
class of any service, group or sub-group of the civil service, and
given that the post cannot be fulfilled by transfer or promotion made
within that service, group or sub-group, the post has to be fulfilled
by making a change in service from another civil service, group or
sub-group, Government of Nepal may change the service, group or
Amended by the First Amendment
Amended by the Second Amendment.
sub-group of the employee selected through a competitive
examination among the civil employees of the same class, having
possessed the qualifications specified in an advertisement done by
the Public Service Commission on request of Government of Nepal.
Provided that, in cases where the position is cut off because
any civil service post of any body of the Government of Nepal has
been redundant and the employee in service in such position has to
be transferred to another service, group or sub-group given that the
post of the service, group, sub-group and class so cut off is not
vacant in any other body nor does such post fall vacant even until
One year, nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to
prevent Government of Nepal from grouping into another service,
group or sub-group, in consultation with the Public Service
Commission.

Chapter 5
Salary, Allowance, Dashain Expenses and Other Facilities
Salary and allowance: (1) A civil employee shall be entitled to
salary and allowance from the day of assumption of his/her post.
•(1a) There shall be a salary and allowance review
committee as follows, so as to review the salary, allowance and
other facilities of the civil employee:
Chief Secretary of the
Government of Nepal
-Chairperson
Secretary, Ministry of Finance
-Member
Secretary
Ministry
General
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Administration
-Member
•(1b) The salary and allowance review committee shall, each
year, recommend to the Government of Nepal a dear allowance
based on the consumer price index. The committee shall, in every
three years, review the salary, allowance and other facilities, based
on, inter alia, the revenue increase rate, total number of positions
and the dear allowance provided based on the price index in the last
three years. The committee may set other procedures on its own.
•(1c) The committee referred to in Sub-section (1a) may
constitute a sub-committee as per necessity and may invite any
concerned area expert and stakeholder to attend its meeting for
suggestion.
•(1d) The secretariat function pursuant to Sub-section (1a)
shall be carried out by the Ministry of General Administration.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall, also based on the
recommendation referred to in Sub-section (1a), each year provide
the civil employee with an allowance in a sum not exceeding
Seventy Five percent of the consumer price index increasing each
year. In a year where the allowance so provided is in excess of
Twenty Five percent or more of the basic pay scale, Twenty Five
percent amount shall be adjusted in the salary scale and the rest
amount provided as an allowance.
(3) Except in the circumstances stipulated in Section 29 or
60, after the commencement of this Act, each civil employee shall
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
be entitled to an increment in salary
as prescribed, upon
completion of one year of service. In so prescribing the increment in
salary, the number of increment in salary shall be adjusted in a
manner that is not less than the amount being received by the
employee. In the event of withholding of increment in salary of any
civil employee, the concerned official must mention in writing on
which date the increment in salary is to be sanctioned.
Entitlement to earned salary and allowance: (1) Each civil
employee shall receive salary and allowance as well, if any
receivable, after completion of each month.
(2) Each civil employee shall receive his/her earned salary
and allowance as well, if any receivable, even if he/she is relieved
of the civil service for any reason whatsoever.
(3) Except as provided in this Act or the Rules framed
hereunder, no salary of any civil employee shall be deducted.
(4) The salary to which any civil employee is entitled shall
not be withheld during the period he/she is serving or is on leave.
•28A. Work performance incentive fund: (1) Government of Nepal
may provide for a work performance incentive fund in order to
encourage the civil employee based on work performance, work
results and achieved results.
(2) The operation, management and other provisions of the
fund as referred to in Sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
Crossing of efficiency bar: No civil employee shall be deemed to
have crossed the efficiency bar until the Secretary at the concerned
Ministry, in the case of a gazetted employee, and the Authority, in
Amended by Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2057(2000).
Amended by the First Amendment
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
the case of a non-gazetted employee, mention in writing that such
civil employee is eligible to cross the efficiency bar.
Salary receivable in the event of suspension: (1) If any civil
employee is suspended in connection with any governmental
business or as a result of an action taken on behalf of Government of
Nepal, such employee shall receive only half of his/her salary during
the period of such suspension.
Provided that, if the charge against him/her is not proved and
he/she is acquitted of the charge, he/she shall receive the salary less
the half salary, if any, he/she has received during the period of
suspension and the full salary (including increment in salary, if any,
to be made) if he/she has not received the half salary. If he/she is
convicted, he/she shall not be entitled to the remaining salary and
allowances after the date of such suspension.
(2) If any civil employee is suspended for any reason other
than that mentioned in Sub-section (1), he/she shall not be entitled
to any salary during the period of such suspension.
Deposit of contribution to Employee Provident Fund: An
amount at the rate of Ten per cent of the monthly salary of the civil
employee shall be deducted, and Government of Nepal shall, adding
the amount of One Hundred percent thereof to such amount, deposit
the total amount in the Employee Provident Fund.
32. Festival expenses and other facilities: (1)A civil employee shall
receive an amount equivalent to the salary of one month being
earned by him/her as the festival expenses each year to celebrate
festival as per his/her religion, culture and custom.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
(2) An employee who has got retired with entitlement to
pension shall be provided with a sum equivalent to the pension of
One month payable to him/her, as the festival expenses.
(3) The provisions relating to medical expenses, disability
pension, facilities payable on grounds of deformities, extra-ordinary
family pension and gratuity, educational allowances, pension, child
care allowances to the offspring or other facilities shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter 6
Retirement, Gratuity and Pension
Compulsory retirement: (1) Any civil employee who has
completed the age of fifty-eight years or completed the tenure as
referred to in Section 17 shall ipso facto retire from the civil service.
(2) Even the civil employees who are incumbent in the civil
service on the extension of their tenure after completion of the
thirty-year service period, prior to the commencement of Subsection (1), may hold office in the civil service until they complete
the age of Fifty Eight years.
Provided that, in the case of the employees whose tenure of
service is specified pursuant to Section 17, that Section shall be
applicable.
(3) For purposes of this Section, the age of a civil employee
shall be calculated on the basis of the age to be set from the birth
day or year inscribed in the certificate of educational institute
submitted by him/her at the time of joining the service or the age to
be set from the birth day or year inscribed in the citizenship
certificate or the age to be set from the birth day or year inscribed in
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
the sheet roll/personal details filled up by him/her at the time of
joining the service, at whichever age he/she gets retired earlier.
34. Power to award retirement: Government of Nepal may, in the
following circumstances, retire any civil employee from the service:
If any civil employee is proved to have provided or attempted
to provide secret governmental documents, deeds or
information under his/her custody or obtained by him/her in
any manner to any unauthorized person or body,
If any civil employee is proved to have committed an
irresponsible conduct contrary to the dignity of his/her post,
by maintaining undesirable contact with any foreign country,
organization or citizen contrary to the national interests.
▲34A. Special provision in respect of incapacitated employee: If it
is certified by the medical board constituted by Government of
Nepal that any civil employee is unable to serve regularly owing to a
physical or mental disease, Government of Nepal may retire that
employee, by adding a service period of Seven years in maximum to
his/her service period.
35. Voluntary retirement: (1) Any civil employee who is eligible to
receive pension and has completed the age limit of Fifty years may
voluntarily retire from the service on such terms and within such
period as set forth and specified in a Notification published by
Government of Nepal in the Nepal Gazette. A service period not
exceeding Seven years shall be added and the total service period
shall be fixed for pension in such a manner that the age does not
cross Sixty years in the case of an employee who joined the civil
service before the 21st Kartik of the year 2049(6 November 1992)
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
and the age does not cross Fifty Eight years in the case of an
employee who joins the civil service on or after that date, out of the
employees who so retire voluntarily.
Provided that, in the case of the employee who has become
redundant because of non-adjustment in position or who is holding a
post not necessary for Government of Nepal, separate facilities and
terms may be specified and application for voluntary retirement may
be invited by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), if
an employee who is eligible to have pension and has completed the
age limit of fifty years intends to have voluntary retirement, he/she
may be retired by promoting him/her to one level higher post if
he/she has served as per Sub-section (3) of Section 37 in the event
that he/she is entitled to promotion to one level higher post pursuant
to Section 20A. of this Act.
Gratuity: (1) If any civil employee, who has served for Five years
or more but has not completed the period required for pension,
retires or leaves service by getting resignation accepted or is
removed from the post without being disqualified for government
service in the future, he/she shall receive gratuity at the following
rate:
In the case of the civil employee who has served
from Five years to Ten years, Half the last
month's salary for each year of his/her service,
In the case of a civil employee who has served
for more than Ten years up to Fifteen years, the
last One month's salary for each year of his/her
service,
In the case of a civil employee who has served
for more than Fifteen years but less than Twenty
years, the last One and Half month's salary for
each year of his service.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), no
gratuity shall be paid to any civil employee who is proved to have
lied about citizenship or age or qualification with the intention of
entering into or continuing to hold the government service.
Pension: (1) A civil employee who has been in government service
for a period of Twenty years or more shall be entitled to a monthly
pension at the following rate:
Total year of service X amount of the last salary
Provided that:
No civil employee who has been dismissed from
service
being
disqualified
government service in the future shall be entitled
to the pension pursuant to this Section.
No pension shall be paid to any civil employee
who is proved to have lied about citizenship or
age or qualification with the intention of
entering into or continuing to hold government
service.
•(1a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
in the case of not obtaining the pension by the service period due to
compulsory retirement to the employees appointed in a class or post
as maximum age of Forty years and appointed pursuant to Sub-
Inserted by the Second Amendment
section (2) of Section 10, pension shall be provided by adding up to
two years in service period to such employee .
Provided that, this provision shall not be applicable to the
employees who retired before the commencement of this subsection.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
the minimum amount of pension shall not be less than half the
amount of basic figure of salary of the incumbent civil employee of
the same post ▲and the maximum amount thereof shall be more
than the basic scale of salary of the incumbent civil employee of the
same post.
(3) If any civil employee who has been in service in the civil
service since 21 Kartik 2049 (6 November 1992) ago has already
completed the service period of thirty years, he/she may retire from
service voluntarily. The total service period of the civil employee
who has so retired voluntarily from service or who has ipso facto
retired pursuant to Section 33 owing to the completion of 58 years
of age upon having been in service in the civil service since 21
Kartik 2049 (6 November 1992) ago shall be set by adding such
remaining period as required for him/her to complete sixty years of
(4) If any employee who has completed a service period of
fifteen years dies, a maximum period of Five years shall be added to
his/her service period, and his/her family shall be allowed to receive
either pension or gratuity, whichever that family chooses.
(5) If any person who is receiving pension on account of
his/her earlier service in any government post is appointed to the
civil post later, he/she shall be entitled to pension pursuant to this
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Section, with the addition of the period of his/her earlier service to
that of his/her subsequent service.
Increment in pension: Where the salary of the incumbent civil
employee is increased, two-third amount of the increment in the
basic figure of salary shall also be added to the amount of pension of
the retired civil employee of the same post.
۩Provided that, this provision shall not be applicable to the
civil employee entitled to pension pursuant to Section 39B.
Family pension and gratuity: (1) If any civil employee dies
while in service or prior to completion of seven years after he/she
started to receive pension, a gratuity or pension as provided for in

Section 36 or 37 shall be provided to his/her family or minor brother
or unmarried sister.
Provided that, in the case of pension, such pension shall not
be available for more than Seven years. No pension shall be
provided to the family of the civil employee, who died prior to
completion of Seven years after he/she started to receive pension,
after completion of Seven years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), if
the recipient of such pension is a minor, he/she shall be entitled to
such pension until he/she attends majority.
(3) The widower husband or widow wife of a civil employee
shall be entitled, for life, to half the amount of pension receivable by
such employee from the date of expiration of the period during
which such widower husband or widow wife is entitled to family
pension pursuant to Sub-section (1) by reason of the death of her
husband or his wife while in service or prior to completion of Seven
Proviso inserted by the Second Amendment.
years after he/she started to receive pension and from the date of
death of such employee where such widower husband or widow wife
is not entitled to such family pension or where his wife or her
husband dies after completion of seven years after he/she started to
receive pension.
۩Provided that, if such widower husband or widow wife
concludes another marriage, he or she shall not be entitled to this
kind of pension facility.
•(3a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (3),
if the pension receiver widower husband or widow wife dies or
he/she marries with other, such pension amount shall be provided as
prescribed to minor children until they attain majority.
(4) Where the salary of incumbent civil employee is
increased, the two-thirds of the total amount increased in the figure
of basic salary shall also be added to the amount of family pension
of the person receiving family pension pursuant to sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3).
(5) If any employee dies prior to receiving any amount to
which that employee is entitled under this Act, such amount shall be
paid to the person from amongst his/her family members who is held
to be entitled to the gratuity or pension of that employee pursuant to
this Act.
(6) In providing gratuity or pension, if the deceased civil
employee has nominated any member of his/her family or his/her
minor brother or unmarried sister, gratuity or pension shall be
provided to such person, and if, for any reason, gratuity or pension
cannot be provided to such person or if nobody has been nominated,
Proviso inserted by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
it shall be provided to such person from amongst the members of
his/her family as may be deemed appropriate by Government of
Nepal.
▲39A. Pension and gratuity of disappeared employee: (1) If any
civil employee who has served in the civil service has disappeared
and whose whereabouts have not been traced until the prescribed
period whether he/she is dead or alive, the amount of gratuity or
pension to which such employee is entitled pursuant to Section 36 or
37 shall be provided to his/her family.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
his/her family shall be provided with the family pension equal to the
full amount of pension for up to Seven years if he/she who is
entitled to pension pursuant to Section 37 disappears prior to
receiving pension and for up to the period remaining to complete
Seven years if he/she disappears after starting to receive pension,
and after that period, his/her wife or husband shall be provided with
family pension equal to half the amount of pension for life.
(3) If the employee disappeared is traced subsequently, the
gratuity as referred to in Section 36, if not paid yet, or the amount of
pension receivable under Section 37 shall be provided to him/herself
from the date on which he/she claims for the same.
Provided that, the person traced subsequently shall not be
entitled to claim such amount of gratuity, pension or family pension
as has already been paid pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2).
•39B. Special provisions relating to gratuity and pension: (1)
Government of Nepal shall set up a separate gratuity and pension
fund for purposes of providing gratuity and pension to civil
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
employees appointed after the date of Notification in Nepal Gazette.
An amount at the rate of at least Ten per cent of the monthly salary
of such employees shall be deducted, and Government of Nepal
shall, adding the amount equal to Ten per cent of the monthly salary
to such amount, deposit the total amount in that fund.
(2) The gratuity and pension related provisions contained in
Sub-section (1a) of Section 32, Section 34A., 35, 36,37, 38, 39 and
39A. shall not be applicable in the case of the civil employees to be
appointed after the publication of notice pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) Government of Nepal shall provide the amount equivalent
to deducted monthly salary pursuant to Sub-section (1) at the time of
payment of salary to the employee.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (3), a
civil employee who has been dismissed from the service with being
disqualified for government service in the future pursuant to Subclause (2) of Clause (b) of Section 59 shall be entitled to receive a
lump sum of the total amount deducted from his/her salary to that
fund and interest as well as profit accrued therein and therefrom.
(5) Other provisions relating to the management and
operation of the amounts to be deposited in the gratuity and pension
fund set up pursuant to Sub-section (1), procedures for the deduction
of funds, payment of fund deducted amounts for purposes of gratuity
and pension and fund deductions shall be as prescribed.
•39C. Special provision of family pension: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if any civil employee in
the course of duties specified by the government for the work
performance dies due to insurgency and his/her service period is less
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
than Twenty years, the pension as per this Act shall be provided to
the husband or wife by adding remaining service period.
(2) The person receiving pension pursuant to Sub-section (1)
shall not receive family pension or gratuity pursuant to Section 39.
(3) If person receiving pension as per this Section marries
with other, he/she shall not receive such pension.
(4) While increasing the salary of the civil employee, Two
third amount of the increased salary shall be added to the person
receiving the family pension.
(5) If the person receiving pension as per this Section dies or
he/she marries with other, such pension amount shall be provided to
minor son, daughter, if any, of the deceased employee until they
attain majority.
•39D Special economic facility: If a civil employee dies while in
service, his/her near heir shall be provided with a lump sum of One
Hundred Fifty Thousand Rupees.
Reference of salary: (1) Wherever in this Chapter and in Chapter
5, a reference of salary is made, it shall mean the concerned civil
employee's salary amount (including salary increment) for the time
being.
(2) For purposes of Sections 36 and 37, the term "last salary"
shall mean the concerned employee's salary at the time of his/her
retirement, and if any civil employee has been on extra-ordinary
leave or under suspension at the time of such retirement, the amount
of full salary shall be computed even for such period.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
40A. Provisions relating to insurance facility: (1) The Government
of Nepal shall establish a fixed term (Sabadhik) life insurance fund
for the civil employee insurance.
(2) A sum of Two Hundred Rupees shall be deducted from the
monthly salary of each civil employee and deposited in the fund
pursuant to Sub-section (1), and the Government of Nepal shall add
the amount equal thereto and make the Twenty year term life
insurance for the insured sum of One Hundred Thousand Rupees.
From the amounts deposited in that insurance fund, the insured sum
and bonus shall be paid to the employee at the time of his/her
retirement.
(3) If any civil employee who has made deduction pursuant to
Sub-section (2) dies before the completion of Twenty years of
service period, an amount of One Hundred Thousand Rupees shall
be provided to his/her family. The following amount shall be
provided to the compulsory retired civil employee.
Ten Thousand Rupees for deducting the amount
of less than One year.
Twenty Five Thousand Rupees for deducting the
amount of more than One year and less than Five
years.
Fifty Thousand Rupees for deducting the amount
of more than Five year and less than Ten years.
Seventy Five Thousand Rupees for deducting the
amount of more than Ten year and less than
Fifteen years.
One Hundred Thousand Rupees for deducting
the amount of more than Twenty years.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Provided that, if the deposited amount,
interest and dividend be higher than the above
mentioned amount, the higher amount shall be
provided from the fund.
(4) If any civil employee who has made deduction pursuant to
Sub-section (2) retires from the service for any reason whatsoever,
prior to the twenty years deduction of amount, an amount equal to
the surrender (Samarpan) value shall be provided to such employee.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2)
and (3), the retired employee shall provide continuity as maturity to
the fixed term life insurance amount in twenty or less than Twenty
years.
Provided that, Government of Nepal shall not provide any
amount for the same.
(6) Other provisions relating to the fixed term life insurance
fund shall be as prescribed.
▲40B. Provisions relating to study, training or study tour: (1) The
concerned Ministry, Commission or Secretariat shall, in order to
send the employees under it for study, training or study tour, prepare
a description thereon and forward it to the Ministry of General
Administration each year.
(2) The Ministry of General Administration must, upon
receipt of the description pursuant to Sub-section (1), specify the
number on subject-wise basis for study, training or study tour and
forward a description thereof to the National Planning Commission.
(3) There shall be a committee as follows to allocate the
opportunities of study, training or study tour received by the
Inserted by the First Amendment.
National Planning Commission and other governmental institution
in the name of Government of Nepal to all the services
proportionately:
Chief
Secretary
Government of Nepal
Chairperson
Secretary at the Ministry of
Finance
Member
Secretary
National
Planning Commission
Member
Secretary at the Ministry of
General Administration
Member
Secretary
(4) The Ministry of General Administration shall distribute
opportunities as per the decision of the committee referred to in
Sub-section (3)
(5) The criteria for making nomination for a study, training or
study tour shall be as prescribed.
▲40C.Period for which service to be done upon completion of
study, training or study tour: Any civil employee who pursues a
study, training or goes on a study tour on the nomination of
Government of Nepal must, upon completing such a study, training
or study tour, serve in the Ministry or Office where he/she was in
service before going on for such study, training or study tour for up
to the period as mentioned below in a compulsory manner, subject to
this Act:
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Period of study, training or
Minimum period for which
study tour
service is to be done
(a) Up to Three months
One year
(b) From Three months to Six months
One and half year
(c) From Six months to Nine months
Two years
(d) From Nine months to One year
Three years
(e) From One year to Two years
Four years
(f) From Two years to Three years
Five years
(g) From Three years to Four years
Seven years
(h) From Four years to Five years
Eight years
40D. Bond to be executed: (1) Any civil employee shall, before going
for having study, training or study tour, by the nomination of
government, execute a bond to the effect that he/she shall return
upon completing such study, training or study tour and carry out
service as referred to in Section 40C.
(2) If any civil employee does not return to the service after
completing the study, training or study tour or does not complete the
period of service required to be carried out under Section 40C., the
salary, allowances received by him/her during the period of the
study, training or study tour and other amounts mentioned in the
bond, as well, shall be realized from such employee as government
dues if such salary, allowances and other amounts be not returned
within the prescribed period.
(3) Any civil employee who, upon obtaining the prior
approval of the competent, has gone to carry out study, training or
Amended by the Second Amendment.
study tour, shall execute a bond to the effect that he/she shall carry
out service as equal to the study training or study tour after the
completion of study, training or study tour.
(4) If a civil employee who has gone for study pursuant to
sub-sections (1) and (3) does not come for service or does not
complete the service period, the duration of such study, training or
study tour shall not be counted in service period of such employee.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if an employee who has gone for study, training or study
tour gets compulsory retirement or dies, any amount shall not be
forfeited from him/her or him/her family for the non-completion of
service pursuant to Section 40C.

Chapter 7
Conduct
Punctuality and regularity: Each civil employee must attend
his/her office regularly during the time appointed by Government of
Nepal and must not remain absent from the duty without having
prior sanction of leave as far as possible.
Discipline and obedience: (1) A civil employee must remain in
discipline and perform his/her duties with honesty and readiness.
(2) A civil employee must expeditiously carry out any orders
given by his/her superior officer on matters relating to governmental
business.
(3) A civil employee must show due respect to all the
employees superior to him/her and treat his/her subordinate
employees properly.
Restriction on using political or undue influence: No civil
employee shall, with intention to satisfy his/her personal interests on
matters relating to his/her service, exert or attempt to exert any
political or other undue influence over any other civil employee.
Restriction on taking part in politics: No civil employee shall
take part in politics.
Restriction on criticizing Government: (1) No civil employee
shall, on his/her real or pseudo name or anonymity, publish any
feature article, provide any news to the press, broadcast a speech
through radio or television etc., make any public speech or publish
any statement in such a manner as to be contrary to the policies of
Government of Nepal or to undermine the mutual relationship
between Government of Nepal and the people or the relationship
with any foreign country.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), it
shall not bar the publishing or broadcasting of any feature article in
such a manner as not to be contrary to the prevailing law and the
policies of Government of Nepal.
Restriction on publishing news relating to governmental
business: No civil employee shall, without being authorized by
Government of Nepal, provide or divulge, directly or indirectly, to
any other unauthorized employee or non-governmental person or
press any confidential matter which was known to him/her in the
course of performing the governmental duty or any matter
prohibited by law or any document or news written or collected by
him/her. This restriction shall also be applicable to a person who has
been relieved of the government service for any reason whatsoever.
Restriction on receiving gift, present, donation etc. and
borrowing: (1) No civil employee shall, without prior approval of
Government of Nepal, accept a gift, donation, present or
gratification of any kind either by him/herself or through any
member of his/her family, or ask for donation or borrow any loan
from any person concerned with any government business, in such a
manner as to affect the government business in any manner.
(2) If any civil employee happens to receive any present from
any foreign government or any representative of such foreign
government, he/she must inform Government of Nepal about it and
shall act accordingly as sanctioned.
Restriction on establishing and operating company and
carrying on trade or profession: (1) No civil employee shall,
without prior approval of Government of Nepal, carry out the
following acts:
To participate in the establishment, registration
or operation of any bank or company,
To carry on any trade or profession requiring
registration according to the prevailing laws,
To accept any kind of employment elsewhere.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), a
civil employee may carry out any literary, scientific or artistic works
in a manner not to be contrary to the policies of Government of
Nepal.
Restriction on taking part in election: No civil employee shall
take part in an election to any political post nor shall solicit vote for
anyone nor shall exercise influence of any kind in the election.
Provided that, this shall not bar the exercise of his/her right to
vote conferred under the prevailing laws, without revealing whom
he/she has voted or intends to vote for.
Restriction on agitation and strike: No civil employee shall
perform an agitation, participate in a strike or entice anyone to
perform such acts in a manner to undermine the sovereignty and
integrity of the Kingdom of Nepal, the law and order situation of the
country, external relations and public decency, make contempt of
court, create hatred among the peoples of various castes, tribes,
religions, classes, regions and communities or aid and abet any
crime.
Restriction on staging strike, detention and Gherao: No civil
employee shall stage any strike or pen-down action and exert any
pressure inflicting physical or mental suffering or entice other
persons to commit such acts in a manner to cause hindrance or
obstruction to any office or officer in the performance of the duties
required by law.
52. Restriction on making representation: No civil employee shall
make representation on behalf of any person or group, except for
making petition to the concerned body or official either by
him/herself or through his/her attorney in respect of any grievance
caused to him/her.
Provided that, nothing in this Section shall be deemed to bar
the carrying out of any work regarding post responsibility of civil
employee and representation on behalf of the authentic trade union
of the civil employees formed pursuant to Sub-section (3) of Section
53. Provision relating to professional organization of civil
employees: (1) The civil employees may form an organization
under the provisions of this Act.
(2) The following provisions shall be complied with while
forming the trade union pursuant to Sub-section (1).
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
The employees of gazetted third class or lower
than that except the gazetted class employees
who work as the head of the office, may form a
trade union of civil employees at the national
level
receiv
membership
their
professional entitlement and welfare.
The registration of the trade union of civil
employees shall be made in the Department of
Labour and Employement Promotion.
(3) The authentic trade union of civil employees shall be
formed as follows:
The member of the trade union of civil
employees as formed pursuant to Sub-section (1)
may form authentic trade union of civil
employees with appointing officials.
The authentic trade union of civil employees
shall have the right to submit own professional
demands and conduct social dialogue and
collective bargaining at the concerned institution
at the district, departmental and national levels.
In the case of not forming the authentic trade
union of civil employees, the trade union of civil
employees formed pursuant to Sub-section (1)
may conduct collective bargaining with mutual
consent of each other.
The other provisions relating to authentic trade
union of civil employees shall be as prescribed.
(4) The functions, duties and powers of the trade union of
civil employees shall be as follows:
The duties of the trade union of civil employees
formed pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (3) are
to provide suggestion and assistance to the
Government of Nepal about effective and
dynamic civil service while taking account of the
protection and promotion of employees’ right
and interest.
The trade union of civil employees may conduct
creative and artistic work along with asembly,
training and symposim.
The trade union of civil employees shall have
right
association,
receive
membership
association,
receive
membership of an international association and
represent on behalf of the association.
(5) The Government of Nepal may take suggestions from the
authentic trade union of civil employees while making law relating
to civil service.
(6) The competent authority shall have to manage the transfer
of the officials of the authentic trade union of civil employees and
national level trade unions formed pursuant to Sub-sections (1) and
(3) on their demand to their appropriate working area.
(7) The tour up to thirty days in one year may provide to the
central officials and members of the national level trade union
formed pursuant to Sub-sections (1) and (3) to participate a seminar,
workshop, assembly, work related with the organization at the
domestic and international level without causing financial obligation
to the Government of Nepal .
(8) The other provisions of registration, condition thereon and
process relating to trade union of civil employees shall be as
prescribed.
54. Statement of property: Each civil employee must submit a
statement of his/her property.
•54A. Prohibition on torture: (1) No civil employee shall subject any
one to torture.
(2) No civil employee shall commit sexual abuse.
•54B. Other conduct: (1) In discharging duties in his/her office, a civil
employee must treat all in a decent manner.
(2) The civil employee must bear the responsibilities which
may arise according to his/her office and post and perform works in
an impartial, fair, efficient and prompt manner.
(3) The civil employee must not use or consume any
government property for domestic use.
(4) The civil employee must not depute any government
employee, appointed as to get salary by the government service to
domestic work except office work.
•54C. Treatment to stakeholders: (1) The civil employee must accord
decent treatment to the stakeholders related with his/her works.
(2) A clear information, inter alia, on the matters and process
related with the work of the stakeholders and the time required to
perform the work must be given to the stakeholders in due time.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
To keep conduct compatible with own service and post: Each
civil employee must also keep his/her conduct compatible with
his/her service and post.
▲55A. Powers to warn: If any civil employee is not punctual, does not
carry out the order given by the employee superior to him/her on
matters relating to any government business or becomes reckless or
slow on office works, the concerned supervisor may give a warning
to such an employee, with setting out the reason therefor; and
records thereof must be maintained in the sheet roll/personal details
file of the concerned employee.

Chapter 8
Service Security
Security of service of civil employee: No civil employee, other
than the following civil employee, shall be removed or dismissed
from the civil service without providing him/her with a reasonable
opportunity to furnish proofs his/her defense:
Who has been convicted by a court of a criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
Who is holding a temporary post,
Who has disappeared and whose whereabouts are not known
or there are sufficient grounds that it is not possible to
establish contact with him/her.
•(d) Who is convicted by a court of a corruption charge.
Saving of civil employees: (1)No case may be instituted against
any civil employee in respect of any government business performed
by him/her considering it to be the carrying out of the duties of
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
his/her post, without fulfilling the procedures as mentioned in Subsection (2).
(2) In order to institute a case against any civil employee
pursuant to Sub-section (1), an approval of the Authority shall be
required in respect of a criminal case; and the following matters
have to be observed in respect of a civil case:
Two months have elapsed after a written notice
stating the reasons for instituting the case and
the name and address of the plaintiff and of
his/her attorney, if any, has been delivered to the
Authority or the concerned civil employee or
sent by post through a registered mail and a copy
notice
submitted
Government of Nepal.
The case has been filed within eight months
from the date of cause of action.
(3) In respect of any act performed by any civil employee in
the course of discharging the duties of his/her post while he/she was
incumbent, no case may be instituted against him/her without the
approval of Government of Nepal, even after the termination of
his/her service.
(4) If Government of Nepal gives approval to institute a case
pursuant to Sub-section (3), Government of Nepal shall defend on
his/her behalf.
Security of conditions of service: The conditions of service
relating to salary, gratuity, pension and other facilities of any civil
employee prevailing at the time of his/her appointment shall not,
without his/her consent, be so altered as to cause adverse effects on
him/her. If any subsequent amendment causes adverse effects, in
any manner, on such conditions of service of any civil employee
who is already incumbent prior to such amendment, such amended
provisions shall not be applicable to him/her in absence of his/her
written consent to the application of such provisions.

Chapter 9
Punishment and Appeal
Punishment: A civil employee may be subjected to the
department punishment as follows, if there exist appropriate and
sufficient reasons:
(a) Ordinary Punishment:
Censure,
Withholding of promotion for up to two years or
withholding of a maximum of two salary increments,
Withholding of promotion for two to five years, or
withholding of a maximum of two to five salary
increments,
Special punishment:
Removal from service, without being disqualified for
government service in the future.
Dismissal from service, with being disqualified for
government service in the future.
60. Censure or withholding of promotion for up to two years or
withholding of a maximum of two salary increments:
Punishment of censure or withholding of promotion for up to two
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
years or withholding of a maximum of two salary increments may be
imposed on a civil employee, in any of the following circumstances:
If his/her performance did not found satisfactory,
If he/she fails to hand over the charges pursuant to the
prevailing law,
If he/she is given warning for up to two times a year under

Section 55A.,
If he/she violates the matters relating to conduct mentioned in
this Act and the Rules framed hereunder,
If he/she fails to observe any direction given by the official
superior to him/her in respect of his/her frequent disregard of
grievances and complaints of the stakeholders,
If the office-bearer obliged to enforce, or cause to be
enforced, the job description fails to do so.
•60A.Withholding of promotion for two to five years or
withholding of a maximum of two to five salary increments
or demoting to the basic scale of the post: Punishment of
withholding of promotion for up to five years or withholding of a
maximum of five salary increments or demoting to the basic scale of
the post held by him/her may be imposed on a civil employee, in any
of the following circumstances:
If he/she commits breach of discipline,
If he/she violates the matters relating to conduct mentioned in
this Act and the Rules framed hereunder,
If he/she fails to settle advances pursuant to the prevailing
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
If he/she fails to observe any direction given in respect of
irregularities found from management audit.
If he/she frequently absent in the office without prior notice.
Removal or dismissal from service: (1) A civil employee may
be removed from serve, without being disqualified for government
service in the future, in any of the following circumstances:
If the civil employee fails to perform the duties
or responsibilities of his/her post due to his/her
own incapacity.
If he/she frequently violates the matters relating
to conduct.
he/she
frequently
consumes
alcoholic
substances during the office hours.
If he/she frequently commits acts of indiscipline.
If he/she takes part in politics.
If he/she frequently neglects the responsibilities
of his/her post.
If he/she absents himself/her from his/her office
continuously for ninety days without having
sanction of a leave.
(2) A civil employee may be dismissed from service, with
being disqualified for government service in the future, in any of the
following circumstances:
If he/she is convicted by a court of a criminal
offence involving moral turpitude.
If he/she commits corruption.
•61A. Special provisions relating to departmental action and
punishment: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Act, if, pursuant to the Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority Act, 2048 (1991), that Commission, and,
pursuant to the prevailing law, the concerned body writes for
departmental action against any civil employee, departmental
punishment must be imposed accordingly, after fulfilling the
required procedures.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
if any civil employee is found absent in office without approved
leave, he/she may be registered as absent and his/her salary may be
deducted. Such period shall not be counted in the service period.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
no office-bearer shall allow a civil employee who remains absent for
a period exceeding ninety consecutive days to attend the office, by
marking him/her as non-attendant. Departmental action shall be
taken against the office-bearer who so allows office attendance; and
the salary and allowances, as well, received by the employee who
has been so allowed to attend the office shall be realized from the
office-bearer who has so allowed office attendance as governmental
dues.
62. Departmental punishment awarding official: (1) The following
authority shall have the powers to issue order of punishment to the
civil employee pursuant to Clause (b) of Section 59.
The Government of Nepal for the employee
working in first class and above that post.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Concerned institution special class official for
the employee working in gazetted second and
third class.
Concerned institution departmental head or
gazetted head of the office for the non gazetted
civil employees.
(2) The authority to issue order of punishment pursuant to
Clause (a) of Section 59 shall be as prescribed.
63. Delegation of powers to award departmental punishment:
Government of Nepal may, by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette,
delegate the powers of any official empowered to issue order of
punishment pursuant to Section 62 to any other official specified in
that Notification, to be exercised for such period as specified in that
Notification.
Powers to suspend: (1) If
investigation
charge
mentioned in Section 61 is to be conducted in respect of any civil
employee, the official empowered to issue order of punishment may
suspend such a civil employee until the conclusion of the
investigation.
Provided that, generally suspension shall not be ordered
unless the following circumstance exists:
Where there is a possibility that he/she can
collect false evidence or conceal any evidence
against him/her if he/she is not suspended and is
allowed to carry out the duties of his/her post, or
Where there is a possibility of governmental loss
or damage if he/she is not suspended and is
allowed to carry out the duties of his/her post.
(2) The official empowered to issue order of punishment to a
civil employee may give a notice of the charge to him/her on his/her
removal or dismissal from service, and may also suspend him/her.
(3) In suspending a civil employee pursuant to Sub-section
(1), he/she must not be suspended ordinarily for more than two
months. The action against the employee must be completed within
that period. If such action cannot be completed within that period
because of the occurrence of any extra-ordinary circumstance and
the period of suspension has to be extended, the period of
suspension may be extended for up to one month with the prior
approval of the Authority.
(4) Any civil employee arrested and detained for a criminal
charge involving moral turpitude shall be deemed to have ipso facto
been suspended during the period of such detention.
Termination of suspension: If any civil employee is reinstated in
his/her post or ▲the period as referred to in Sub-section (3) of

Section 64 is completed or he/she is removed or dismissed from
service, his/her suspension shall stand terminated.
Providing opportunity for defense: (1) The official empowered
to issue order of departmental punishment must, prior to issuing an
order of punishment to any civil employee, serve on him/her a
notice, explaining the reason for taking such action and give an
opportunity to defend him/herself within a reasonable time limit. In
giving such opportunity, the charge against him/her must be clearly
indicated and the facts and grounds on which each charge is based
must be specified. In such case, the concerned employee must also
submit his/her defense within the time limit; and the concerned
official must seriously consider the defense so submitted.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
(2) The official empowered to issue order of departmental
punishment may, if he/she thinks it necessary, conduct an
investigation either by him/herself or through any other officer. The
officer conducting the investigation must follow the prescribed
procedures.
To propose punishment prior to issuance of order of special
punishment: If the concerned civil employee does not submit
defense under Section 66 or if the defense submitted by such
employee is not satisfactory, the official empowered to issue order
of departmental punishment must, prior to issuing an order of
special punishment, ask such civil employee to furnish an
explanation why the proposed punishment intended to be imposed
on him/her should not be imposed on, within a reasonable time limit
in this respect.
Seeking consultation of Public Service Commission: If it
appears that the defense submitted under Section 66 or the
explanation furnished under Section 67 by the concerned civil
employee in the course of action on departmental punishment is not
satisfactory and punishment is to be imposed on such employee, the
official empowered to issue order of departmental punishment must
propose the punishment intended to be imposed on that employee
and seek consultation of the Public Service Commission.
Constitution, functions and duties of Administrative Court:
(1) An Administrative Court shall be constituted, as prescribed,
under the chairpersonship of a person who is a sitting or a retired
judge of the Appellate Court, in order to hear appeals against the
decisions of the official empowered to issue order of departmental
punishment -----.
•(1a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1),
where an appeal against the order of punishment as referred to in
Clause (a) of Section 59 has been filed with any official at the time
of commencement of this Section and yet to be settled, such appeal
must be settled by the official with whom it has been filed.
(2) The decision made by the Administrative Court shall be
final.
(3) If, on the final settlement of an appeal under this Section
in regard to any civil employee, his/her service is to be reinstated by
virtue thereof but he/she does not appear within three months from
the date of receipt of a notice of that decision, it shall not be
mandatory to reinstate him/her in the service.
(4) Other functions and duties of the Administrative Court
and the procedures to be followed by the Court while exercising its
jurisdiction or while performing its other functions shall be as
prescribed.
(5) The appellant may, if he/she so wishes, appear on the
appointed days either in person or by his/her attorney and may have
his/her case pleaded by a legal practitioner.
Decision not to be affected: No decision shall be affected by any
minor error which does not cause substantial effects on the action
against a civil employee conducted by the competent authority
pursuant to this Act or the Rules framed hereunder.
Deleted by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.

Chapter 10
Miscellaneous
Leave to which civil employee is entitled: The civil employees
shall be entitled to the following leaves, as prescribed:
Casual and Festival Leave;
Home Leave;
Sick Leave;
Maternity Leave;
•(d1) Maternity Care Leave;
Obsequies Leave;
Study Leave;
Extra-ordinary Leave;
•71A. Unpaid Leave: (1) If the husband or wife of any civil employee is
deputed to the foreign based Nepalese Embassy or mission, such
civil employee shall get unpaid leave as prescribed.
(2) The unpaid leave pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall not be
counted in the period of service.
Delegation of powers: (1) Government of Nepal may, by a
Notification in the Nepal Gazette, so delegate the powers conferred
to it by this Act that such powers may be exercised by the civil
employee or official specified in that Notification.
Provided that, no powers conferred by this Act may be
delegated by any Act, other than this Act.
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
(2) Any official may so delegate the powers conferred to
him/her by this Act to his/her subordinate civil employee that such
powers are to be exercised under her/his general supervision.
▲72A. Management audit: Except in the matters within the domain of
the Public Service Commission, the Ministry of
General
Administration may supervise, monitor and evaluate as to whether
the civil employees in service in different bodies of the Government
of Nepal have abided by the prevailing law and other administrative
rules and procedures and give direction, and if, in making such
supervision, it appears that departmental action is to be taken
against any civil employee, it may also recommend such action; and
it shall submit an annual report thereof to the Government of Nepal.
73. Full salary and allowance to be received on being reinstated
in civil service: (1) If any civil employee is re-instated in the civil
service upon annulment by the court of the order of his/her
retirement, removal or dismissal from civil service, such employee
shall be entitled to the salary, allowances, •Festival expenses as well
as increment in salary, if any, receivable, from the date of his/her
retirement, removal or dismissal from civil service to the date of
his/her re-instatement in the civil service.
(2) If any civil employee who was retired or removed or
dismissed from civil service prior to 4th Jestha of the year 2050 (17
May 1993) is reinstated in the civil service by a court order issued
after that date, such employee shall also be entitled to the salary,
allowance and increment in salary pursuant to Sub-section (1).
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
•73A. Provisions relating to disadvantage, grievance of civil
employees and handling thereof: (1) Except in cases where a
civil employee may file a complaint or appeal elsewhere pursuant to
this Act and the prevailing law, if the civil employee thinks that
he/she has suffered disadvantage in the service, conditions and
facilities provided under this Act and the rules framed hereunder and
in any matter concerning the employee or if no action has been
taken even after informing the concerned body about the same, such
employee may present, as prescribed, the disadvantage and
grievance which he/she has suffered to the prescribed body.
(2) Other provisions relating to disadvantage, grievance of
civil employees and handling thereof shall be as prescribed.
•73B Establishment and operation of employee welfare fund: (1)
There may be established as prescribed a welfare fund for the
welfare of working civil employees, retired persons and their family
members.
(2) The operation and management of the fund established
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
•73C. Provision relating to employee to Royal Palace Service: (1)
The employee working in Royal Palace Service at the time of
commencement of this Act, shall be administered and managed by a
separate regulation.
(2) The Royal Palace Service Act, 2029 and Rules made
thereunder are hereby repealed.
Handing over charge: Any civil employee required to hand over
the cash, goods in kind or documents required to be handed over by
Inserted by the Second Amendment.
him/her must hand them over to the concerned employee within the
prescribed time-limit, and the person required to take them over
must take them over within that time-limit.
Power to frame rules: Government of Nepal may, in order to
implement the objectives of this Act, frame rules to be generally
applicable to all the civil services or to be severally applicable to
different services or groups.
Repeal and saving: (1) The Civil Service Act, 2013 (1957) in
hereby repealed.
(2) All the acts done and actions taken pursuant to the Civil
Service Act, 2013 (1957) and the rules framed thereunder shall be
deemed to have been done and taken under this Act.
Note: 1. An Act made to Amend Some Nepal Laws, 2063 has
changed the words "His Majesty's Government into
"Government of Nepal" instead of."
2. Sections 64 and 65 of the Civil Service (Second
Amendment) Act, 2064 shall be as follows.
64. To maintain ipso facto in the changed service:
The service of the employees and officers working and
being maintained in the Auditor General Office as per

Section 9 of the Audit Act, 2048 at the commencement of
this Act shall be ipso facto maintained in the service
pursuant to Clause (e1) of Section 3 and those officers and
employees shall ipso facto be changed in the same class.
65. Repeal and saving: (1) Section 9 of the Audit Act,
2048 has been repealed.
(2) All acts preformed or actions taken from the
17th Aashad of the year 2063 to the earlier date of the
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have
been performed or taken under this Act.
(3) The prevailing provisions before of 30th
Aashad of the year 2062 shall continue to apply until
the provisions relating to promotion on ground of work
efficiency commence.

===== SOURCE: Company-Act(2063).pdf =====

Companies Act, 2063 (2006)
Date of Authentication:
2063.7.7 (3 November 2006)
1. Some Nepal Act (Amendment) Act, 2064
2064.5.9 (26 August 2007)
Act Number 18 of the Year 2063 (2006)
An Act made to amend and consolidate the law relating to companies
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the law relating to
companies in order to bring about dynamism in the economic development of the
country by promoting investment in the industry, trade and business sectors through
economic liberalization and make the incorporation, operation and administration of
companies much easier, simpler and more transparent;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the House of Representatives in the First Year
of the issuance of the Proclamation of the House of Representatives, 2063 (2006).

Chapter 1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This act may be called as the “Companies
Act, 2063(2006)”.
(2) This Act shall be deemed to have come into force on 20 Ashwin
2063 (6 October 2006).
Definitions: In this Act, unless the subject or the context otherwise requires,
“Company” means a company incorporated under this Act.
“Private company” means a private company incorporated under this
“Public company” means a company other than a private company.
“Holding company” means a company-having control over a subsidiary
company.
“Subsidiary company” means a company controlled by a holding
company.
“Foreign company” means a company incorporated outside Nepal.
“Listed company” means public company which has its securities listed
in the stock exchange.
“Company not distributing profits” means company incorporated under

Chapter 19 on conditions that it shall not be entitled to distribute or pay
to its members any dividends or any other moneys out of the profits
earned or savings made for the attainment of any objectives.
“Promoter” means a person who, having consented to the matters
contained in the memorandum of association and the articles of
association to be furnished in the Office for the incorporation of a
company, signs the same in the capacity of promoter.
“Officer” includes director, chief executive, manager, company
secretary, liquidator and any employee undertaking departmental
responsibility of the company.
“Memorandum of association” means the memorandum of association
of a company.
“Articles of association” means the articles of association of a company.
“Prospectus” means a prospectus to be published by a company pursuant
to Section 23.
“Share” means the divided portion of the share capital of a company.
“Preference share” means a share issued as a preference share pursuant
to this Act.
“Ordinary share” means a share other than a preference share.
“Bonus share” means a share issued as an additional share to
shareholders, by capitalizing the saving earned from the profits or the
reserve fund of a company, and this term includes the increase of the
paid up value of a share by capitalizing the saving or reserve fund.
“Shareholder” means a person having ownership in the share of a
company.
“Debenture” means any bond issued by accompany whether putting its
assets as collateral or not.
“Debenture trustee” means a body corporate undertaking the
responsibility for the protection of interests of debenture-holders at the
time of issuance of debentures by a company.
“Register” means a register of shareholders or debenture-holders
maintained under Section 46.
“Seal of company” means the seal of a company to be used by it.
“Securities Board” means the securities board established under the
prevailing law to regulate and manage securities.
“Securities” means any shares, bonds, debentures or stocks issued by a
company, and this term includes the receipt relating to deposits of
securities and the rights and entitlement relating to securities.
“Director” means any director of a company and this term includes any
alternate director.
“Board of directors” means the board of directors of a company.
“Managing director” means a managing director of a company.
“Premium share” means a share so issued by a company as to sell it for
a value in excess of its face value.
“Net worth” means the assets of a company remaining after deducting
the paid up capital, reserve, fund or free reserve of whatever designation
to which shareholders have right or all other liabilities other than
goodwill, if any, of the company as well as loss provisions , if any, from
the total assets of the company for the time being.
“Consensus agreement” means an agreement made unanimously by all
the shareholders of a private company existing for the time being in
respect of the operation of the company.
“Office” means the Company Registrar’s Office set up by the
Government of Nepal for the administration of companies.
“Register” means the Registrar of the Office.
“Independent director” means any independent director appointed under
Sub-section (3) of Section 86.
“Court” means the commercial bench of a court specified by the
Government Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, with the
consent of the Supreme Court.
(z9) “Close relative” means a partition shareholder in joint family or husband,
wife, father, mother, mother-in -law, father-inlaw, elder brother,
younger brother, elder sister, younger sister, sister-in–law ,(elder or
younger brother’s wife), brother-in–law , sister–in–law, brother-inlaw,
(husband of elder sister), uncle, aunt, maternal uncle, maternal aunt, son,
daughter, daughter-in-law ,grand–son, grand-daughter, grand-daughterin– law or son-in–law .
(z10) “Prescribed” or “as prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.

Chapter 2
Incorporation of Company
Incorporation of Company: (1) Any person desirous of undertaking any
enterprise with profit motive may, either singly or jointly with others,
incorporate a company for the attainment of one or more objectives set forth in
the memorandum of association.
(2) There shall be a minimum of seven promoters for the incorporation
of a public company.
Provided, however, that seven promoters shall not be required for the
incorporation of another public company by any public company.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, a
company not distributing profits may, subject to the provisions contained in

Chapter-19, be incorporated for the attainment of one or more objectives.
Application to be made for incorporation of company: (1) Any person
desirous of incorporating a company pursuant to Section 3 shall make an
application to the Office, in such format and accompanied by such fees as
prescribed, and along with the following documents, as well:
The memorandum of association of the proposed company,
The articles of association of the proposed company,
In the case of a public company, a copy of the agreement,
if any, entered into between the promoters prior to the
incorporation of the company,
In the case of a private company, a copy of the consensus
agreement, if any, entered into ,
Where prior approval or license has to be obtained from
anybody under the prevailing law prior to the registration
of a company carrying on any particular type of business
or transaction pursuant to the prevailing law, such
approval or license,
Where the promoter is a Nepalese citizen, a certified copy
of the citizenship certificate and where a corporate body is
a promoter, a certificate of registration of incorporation,
decision of the Board of directors, regulating the
incorporation of the company and major documents
regarding incorporation.
Where the promoter is a foreign person or company or
body, permission obtained under the prevailing law to
make investment or carry on business or transaction in
Nepal,
Where the promoters is a foreign person, a document
proving the country of his/her citizenship,
Where the promoter is a foreign company or body, a
certified copy of the incorporation of such company or
body and major documents relating to such incorporation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section(1), if the
promoter agrees to accept the articles of association in the format prescribed for
the incorporation of a company with a single promoter of single shareholder, it
shall not be required to submit the articles of association of the proposed
company.
Registration of company: (1) Where an application is made for the
incorporation of a company pursuant to Section 4, the Office shall, after
making necessary inquiries, register such company within 15 days after the
date of making of the application and grant the company registration certificate
to the applicant, in the format as prescribed.
(2) After a company has been registered pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
company shall be deemed incorporated.
(3) The office shall maintain company register in the format as
prescribed, for purpose of Sub-section (1).
(4) After the incorporation of a company under this Section, subject to
this Act, the matters contained in the memorandum of association and the
articles of association shall be binding on the company and its shareholders as
if these where the provisions contained in separate agreements between the
company and every shareholder and amongst its shareholders.
(5) Without registering a company under this Act, no person shall use
the name company and carry on any kind of transaction by the name of any
firm or institution.
Power to refuse to register company: (1) The Office may refuse to register a
company in any of the following circumstances:
If the name of the proposed company in identical with the
name by which a company in existence has been
previously registered or so resembles the name of that
company as it might cause misleading,
If the name or objective of the proposed company is
contrary to the prevailing law or appears to be improper or
undesirable in view of public interest, morality, decency,
etiquette etc. or reflects criminal motive ,
If the name of the proposed company is identical with the
name of a company of which registration has been
cancelled pursuant to this Act or that of a company which
has been insolvent under the prevailing law or so
resembles such name as it might cause misleading and a
period of five years shall not expired after such
cancellation of registration or insolvency,
If the requirements for the incorporation of a company
under this Act are not fulfilled.
(2) If the office refuses to register company in any of the circumstances
as referred to in Sub-section (1) it shall give a notice there of, accompanied by
the reasons therefore, to the applicant no later than 15 days after the date of
application made for the incorporation of company pursuant to Section 4.
(3) If the office refuses to register any company pursuant to Sub-section
(1) or fails to give a notice pursuant to Sub-section (2), a person who is not
satisfied may file a complaint in the court within fifteen days.
Company to be a body corporate: (1) Any company incorporated under this
Act shall be an autonomous and corporate body with perpetual succession.
(2) Subject to this Act, company like an individual, acquire, hold, sell,
dispose of or otherwise deal with, any movable or immovable property.
(3) A company may sue and be also sued by its own name.
(4) A company may, like an individual, enter into a contract and
exercise the rights and perform the obligations as referred to in the contract.
Limited liability: The liability of a shareholder of a company incorporated
under this Act in respect of its transactions shall be limited on to the maximum
value of shares which he has subscribed or undertaken to subscribe.
Number of shareholders: (1) The number of shareholders of a private company
shall not exceed fifty.
(2) Subject to the proviso to Sub-section (2) of section 3, the number of
shareholders of a public company shall be seven in minimum and a maximum
of any number.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), any
employee who has purchased a share of a company under scheme of selling
shares to employees or any employee who has already purchased a share under
such scheme but is not in service of the company for the time being shall not be
counted as a shareholder.
10. Terms to be abided by company: An company incorporated under this Act
shall abide by the following terms, in addition to those set forth in this Art,
memorandum of association or articles of association:
The company shall carry on all of its activities and transactions by its
name.
A private company shall add the words “private limited’’ to its name as
the last words and a public company shall add the word “limited” to its
name as the last word.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to a
company not distributing profit.
A private company shall not sell its shares and debentures publicly.
A private company shall not pledge, or otherwise transfer title to, its
securities to any person other than its shareholder without fulfilling the
procedures contained in the memorandum of consensus agreement,
A company shall not open a partnership or private firm.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, a company not distributing
profits shall not distribute dividends among its members or pay, directly
or indirectly, any amount to a member or his/her close relative.
Paid up capital of public company: (1) The paid up capital of a public
company shall be a minimum of ten million rupees, except as otherwise
provided in the prevailing law or in a notification by the Government of Nepal
in the Nepal Gazette that the paid up capital of any particular company shall be
in excess of the said required minimum.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), a public
company which does not have the paid up capital as mentioned in that Subsection at the time of commencement of this Act shall maintain the capital
referred to in Sub-section (1) no later than 22 Ashwin 2065 (8 December 2008).
To be incorporated as public company to carry on some specific
transactions: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, a
company carrying on the business of banking, financial transactions, insurance
business related transactions, stock exchange business, pension fund or mutual
fund or a company carrying on such other business or transactions as may be
prescribed shall be incorporated as a public company.
Conversion of private company into public company: (1) In the following
circumstances, a private company shall be converted into a public company
under this section:
If the general meeting of the private company, by adopting
a special resolution, decides to convert that company into
a public company,
Provided, however, that no private company shall
be capable of being converted into a public company
unless and until it fulfills the requirements to be fulfilled
under this Act for being a public company
If twenty five percent or more of the shares of a private
company are subscribed by one or more than one public
company,
Provided,
however,
computing
percentage as referred to in this Clause, the share passed
by any banking or financial company as a trustee shall not
be calculated.
If a private company subscribes twenty five percent or
more of the shares of a public company.
(2) In the circumstances as refer to in Clause (a) of Sub-section (1), the
concerned private company, shall for being converted into a public company,
make an application as prescribed, accompanied by a copy of the resolution
mentioned in that Clause and by the fees as prescribed , to the office within
thirty days after the date of such resolution.
(3) On receipt of an application pursuant to Sub-station (2), the office
shall, if the concerned private company has fulfilled the necessary requirements
for carrying on transactions as a public company, mention in the company
register the contents of conversion of such company into a public company and
give a company conversion certificates as prescribed within sixty days.
(4) If any private company has to be converted into a public company
owing into the circumstances referred to in Clause (b) or (c) of Sub-section (1),
the concerned private company shall make an application, as prescribed, setting
out all details, accompanied by the fees as prescribed, to the Office for being
converted into a public company within seven days after the date of occurrence
of such circumstances.
(5) On receipt of an application pursuant to Sub-section(4), the Office
shall, if such company has fulfilled the requirements to be fulfilled by a public
company under this Act to carry on transactions, mention in the company
register the contents of conversion of company into a public company and give
a company conversion certificate as prescribed.
(6) If private company is converted into a public company pursuant to
this Section, any subsidiary company of that company, as well, shall, ipso facto
be deemed to have been converted into a public company in the same date.
(7) In the event of conversion into a public company pursuant to Subsection (6), it shall be the obligation of the concerned company to make an
application, accompanied by the required documents, to the Office to get
recorded in the company register the contents of conversion of such subsidiary
company into a public company and obtain the certificate.
(8) In the event of conversion of any private company into a public
company pursuant to this Section, the provisions applicable to the public
company under this Act shall be deemed to be, ipso facto, applicable to that
company after the date of such conversion.
(9) In the event of conversion of any private company into a public
company pursuant to this Section, all the assets and liabilities of the private
company so converted shall devolve on the successor company.
Conversion of public company into a private company: (1) In the following
circumstance, a public company shall be converted into a private company
under this Section:
If the number of shareholders of the public company
becomes less than seven,
If the public company fails to maintain its paid-up capital
under Section 11 or the paid-up capital as referred to in

section 11 is not maintained because of reduction in
capital pursuant to section 57.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to the company as referred to in Sub-section (2) of

Section 11.
(2) In the event of occurrence of a circumstance as referred to in Subsection (1), the concerned public company shall make necessary amendments
to its memorandum of association and articles of association and convert it into
a private company within six months.
(3) The concerned public company shall make an application,
accompanied by copies of the memorandum of association and articles of
association amended pursuant to subsection (2) and the prescribed fees, to the
Office for being converted into a private company, within thirty days after the
making of such amendment.
(4) On receipt of an application pursuant to Sub-section(3),the Office
shall mention in the company register the contents of conversion of such
company into a private company and give a company conversion certificate, as
prescribed, within sixty days.
(5) In the event of conversion of any public company into a private
company pursuant to Sub-section (4), all the assets and liabilities of the public
company to be so converted shall devolve on the successor company.
Service of summons, notice etc: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the prevailing law, if any notice, summons, letters rogatory etc. required to be
served on a company, director, shareholder, debenture-holder or employee in
regard to the transactions of, or any matter related with, the company, is
delivered at the registered office of the company or sent by registered post or
sent through the tale-fax, email, telex or similar other electronic device
installed in such office, such notice, summons or letter oratory shall be deemed
to have been duly served. If any notice, summons, letters rogatory etc. cannot
be so served, the concerned company, director or employee may be informed
thereof by broadcasting or publishing a notice pertaining there to by radio,
television or in any newspaper circulating at national level. In such a case, he/
she shall be deemed to have been informed thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, if any
notice, summons, letter rogatory etc. is required to be served by a company or
by any competent authority or court on any director, shareholder, debentureholder or employee or the company in any matter related with his/her duties of
office, it may be sent to the telex, email, telefax address, if any, given by such
director, shareholder or employee and where such address has not been given,
it may be sent by registered post to the address supplied by him/her for
correspondences by post and where such summons, notice, letters rogatory etc.
is so sent, the same shall be deemed to have been duly served.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, in
providing a notice or information required to be sent by accompany to its
shareholder debenture-holder or director under this Act or receiving any
information from them, such notice or information may be sent to an electronic
communication address supplied by them, by using electronic communication
device as provided in the articles of association of the company or if they so
agree.
Provided, however, that such notice or information shall be sent by post
or through other reliable means to the shareholder, debenture-holder or director
who does not consent to the service of such notice or information on him/her
by electronic communication device.
Functions and duties of Registrar: (1) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to
implement this Act and carry out company administration.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of Sub-section (1), the Registrar
may frame and issue necessary directives for the implementation of this Act
and the carrying out of company administration related functions in an
effective or systematic manner: and it shall be the duty of each company and
officer to abide by such directives.
(3) The directives issued pursuant to Sub-section (2) shall be published
in such a manner that such directives are available to the general public.
(4) The Registrar may, as per necessity, delegate any of the powers
conferred to him/ her under this Act to any officer employee subordinate to
him/her.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section,
nothing in this Section shall be deemed to limit the direction given by any
regulatory body to a company under the prevailing law or the authority to be
exercised by that body in respect of such company under the prevailing law.
Pre-incorporation contract: (1) A contract made prior to the incorporation of
a company shall be a proposed contract only, and such contract shall not be
binding on the company.
(2) If, prior to the incorporation of a company, any person carries on any
transaction or borrows money on behalf of the company, such person shall be
personally liable for any contract related with the transaction so carried on,
subject to Sub-section (3).
(3) If, within the time mentioned in any transactions or within the
reasonable time after the incorporation of a company, the company, through its
act, action or conduct, accepts any act, action or conduct, accepts any act,
action to borrowing done or made prior to the date of authorization to
commence its transactions or endorses such act or action, that transaction shall
be binding on the company and the other contracting party; and the person
carrying out such act to action shall be released from the personal liability to be
borne pursuant to Sub-section(2).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
consensus agreement of a private company shall govern any contracts made
prior to the incorporation of such company.

Chapter 3
Memorandum of Association, Articles of Association and prospectus
18. Memorandum of Association: (1) The Memorandum of Association of a
company shall state the following matters:
The name of company,
The address of the registered office of the company,
The objectives of the company,
The acts to be carried out to accomplish the objectives of
the company,
The figure of the authorized capital of the company and
the figure of the share capital to be issued by the company
for time being and the figure of undertaken to be paid by
the promoter of the company,
Types of shares of the company, the rights and powers
inherent in such shares, value of each share and number of
shares of different types,
Restrictions, if any, in the purchase or transfer of shares,
Number of shares which the promoters have undertaken to
subscribe for the time being,
Terms of payments of share amounts,
Statements that the liability of shareholders shall be
limited,
The maximum number of shareholders in case of a private
company,
Other necessary matters.
(2) If any of the following matters shall be done or provided, in addition
to those mentioned in Sub-section(1), the memorandum of association shall
also state such matters:
If the promoter or any other person is entitled to subscribe
shares or acquire title thereto in any manner other than by
making payment in cash, such matter,
If the company is to acquire any property in any manner
from the promoter or any other person at the time of
commencement of its transactions such matter,
If the company itself to bear the expenses incurred on its
incorporation, such matter,
If the promoter or any other person is entitled to any
special privilege or right from the company, such matter.
(3) In subscribing shares or acquiring title thereto by the promoter or
any other person in consideration fit other than cash payment as mentioned
in Clause (a) of Subsection (2) and in acquiring any property by he company
from the promoter or any other person at the time of commencement of its
transactions as mentioned in cause (b), in the case if a public company, such
consideration other than cash and such property shall be caused to be valuated
by an engineer or accountant holding certificate to conduct valuation work
under the prevailing law.
(4) The criteria for the valuation of any property pursuant to Sub-section
(3) shall be as prescribed; and unless such criteria are prescribed, the person
valuating such property shall mention the criteria employed by him/her to
valuate the property.
(5) If the memorandum of association is inconsistent with this Act it
shall ipso facto be void to the extent of such inconsistency.
(6) The format of memorandum of association shall be as prescribed.
Signature to be affixed on memorandum of association: (1) The
memorandum of association of a company shall state the full names and
addresses of its promoters, indicate the number of shares which each promoter
has undertaken to subscribe and be signed by each of them.
(2) The memorandum of association shall clearly contain the names and
address of a witness for each promoter and also bear the signature of such
witness.
(3) Each promoter shall undertake to subscribe the shares as mentioned
in the articles of association of the company and at least one hundred shares if
no provision is so mentioned.
(4) No later than one year after the incorporation of a company, an
application may be made, pursuant to a decision of the board of directors of the
company, to the Office for the rectification of any minor mistake or printing or
typing error appearing in the memorandum of association and articles of
association submitted along with an application made under Section 4.
(5) If an application is made pursuant Sub-section(4),the Office shall, if
it deems proper after examining it, rectify such mistake or error and record the
same.
Provided, however, that no matter shall be rectified in a manner to alter
the main objectives of the company.
Articles of association: (1) A company shall frame the articles of association
in order to attain the objectives set forth in its memorandum of association and
carry out its activities in a well–managed manner.
(2) The articles of association shall state the following matters:
Procedures for convening the general meeting of the
company and notice to be given for such meeting,
Proceedings of general meeting,
Number of directors, provision of alternate director, if any,
and tenure of directors,
Provisions relating to the minutes of decisions of the
general meeting and the board of directors, and duplicate
copies and inspection thereof,
If a person has to subscribe shares to become a director of
a company, minimum number of shares,
In the case of a public company, qualifications and
number of independent director,
Where any professional persons, other than shareholders,
are to be appointed as directors, provisions relating to the
number,
tenure,
qualifications
procedures
appointment of such persons,
Powers and duties of the board of directors and the
managing director,
Authority of directors and delegation of authority,
Quorum for a meeting of the board of directors, notice of
meeting and proceedings of meeting,
Lien on shares,
Different classes of shares and the rights, powers and
restrictions attached to such shares,
Provisions relating to calls on shares and forfeiture of
shares,
Provisions relating to the transfer of shares,
Matters on alteration in share capital,
Matters on buying back of shares by the company, if the
company is to buy back its shares,
Appointment of a company secretary,
Provisions relating to remuneration, allowances and
facilities of directors,
Use of the company’s seal in its transactions, if it is to be
so used,
Accounts, books of accounts and audit of the company,
Provisions on powers to raise loans or debentures,
Amalgamation of the company,
Such matters, if any, as required by the prevailing law to
be mentioned in the articles of association of a company
carrying on any specific business,
Such other necessary matters as required to be mentioned
in the articles of association.
(3) If any provision contained in the articles of association of the
company, inclusive of a provision on the saving of its directors or officers, is
inconsistent with this Act and the memorandum of association, such provision
shall be void to the extent of such inconsistency.
(4) The format of articles of association shall be as prescribed.
Amendment to memorandum of association and articles of association: (1)
The general meeting of a company may, subject to Section 6, amend the
memorandum of association or articles of association, by adopting a special
resolution to that effect.
(2) The company shall give information of any amendment made to the
memorandum of association or articles of association pursuant to Sub-section
(12) to the Office within thirty days; and the Office shall record the same and
give information thereof to the concerned company, within seven days after the
receipt of such information.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (2), if any
company has to amend its name, it shall adopt a special resolution to that effect
at its general meeting and make an application, accompanied by the fees as
prescribed, for prior approval of the Office: and if the Office gives approval to
amend the names as per the application so received, the name of that company
shall be amended.
(4) If a shareholder of a public company who is not satisfied with an
amendment made to the objectives of the company may, on fulfilling the
following requirements, file a petition, setting out the reasons therefore, in the
court to have that amendment declared null and void:
A shareholder or shareholders holding at least five percent
shares of the paid-up capital of the company, except the
shareholders who consent to or vote for the amendment or
alteration, has to make a petition,
A petition has to be filed within twenty one days after the
adoption of the resolution to amend the objectives of the
company,
Where any one is to file a petition on behalf of one or
more than one shareholder entitled to make petition, the
petition has to be filed by a person who is authorized in
writing for that purpose.
(5) Unless and until the court is satisfied that the information about the
contents, date, time and venue of a petition made under Sub-section (4) has
also been given to the company, the petition shall not be heard.
Provided, however, that if it appears from the documents submitted to
the court that the concerned company has refused to acknowledge the notice,
nothing shall prevent the court from hearing the petition.
(6) Where a petition is filed in the court pursuant to Sub-section (4), the
amendment made to the objectives of the company shall not be effective
pending the final decision or order by the court in that matter.
(7) On a petition as referred to in Sub-section (4), the court may issue an
appropriate order, specifying the following terms and conditions:
Declaring the amendment made to the objectives of the
company to be fully or partly valid or void,
Requiring the company to subscribe for a reasonable value,
the shares and other rights held by the shareholders
making a petition under Sub-section (4), upon being
disagreed with the making of alteration in the main
objectives of the company,
The shares have to be subscribed under Clause (b) from
the moneys as referred to in Sub-section(2) of Section 61;
and in the case of a company which has no such moneys,
issuing an order to decrease the capital of the company as
if the share capital were decreased to the extent of such
subscription by adopting a special resolution by the
company; and where such order is issued, the company
shall amend its memorandum of association and articles of
association, subject to the provisions of this Act.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where an
order is issued by the court to fully or partly void the decision made by the
company to amend its objectives, the company shall not be entitled to amend
its memorandum of association or articles of association in that matter without
permission of the court or in a manner contrary to the order of the court.
(9) Where the memorandum of association or articles of association of a
company is altered by an order of the court or the amendment made by the
company is fully or partly endorsed by the court, such alteration or
endorsement shall be enforced as if such alteration or endorsement were made
by the general meeting of the company on its own.
Memorandum of association and articles of association to be published: (1)
A public company shall publish its memorandum of association and articles of
association within three months after getting license to commence its business.
(2) If any amendment is made to the memorandum of association and
articles of association of a public company, the amended memorandum of
association and articles of association shall be published within three months
after such amendment.
(3) A public company shall so keep the memorandum of association and
articles of association published pursuant to Sub–section (1) or (2) at its
registered office that such memorandum and articles can be made available as
and when so demanded by the concerned.
Prospectus to be published: (1) A public company shall publish its prospectus
prior to issuing its securities publicly.
(2) Prior to the publication of prospectus under Sub-section(1), the
prospectus signed by all directors of the company has to be submitted, along
with a written application made to the Securities Board for approval, under the
prevailing laws on securities.
(3) Unless and until the Securities Board approves and gives permission
for the public issue under Sub-section (2) and a copy of such prospectus is
registered with the office, no company or no person, on behalf of such
company, shall publish, or cause to be published , the prospectus of such
company.
(4) If it appears that the prospectus submitted pursuant to Sub-section(2)
omits any important matter or contains any unnecessary matter the Securities
Board shall cause such prospectus to be amended or altered as required and
grant approval to publish it in accordance with law.
(5) If the prospectus submitted pursuant too Sub-section (2) is approved
by the Securities Board, the concerned company shall give to the Office
information thereof, in writing, accompanied by a copy of the approval letter of
the Securities Board; and on receipt of that information, the Office shall
register the prospectus pursuant to this Section.
Provided, however, that if it appears that any matter contained in this Act has
not been complied with, the Office may refuse to register it.
(6) If any person demands for a copy of the prospectus registered
pursuant to Sub-section (5), the Office shall provide such copy by collecting
the prescribed fees.
(7) In publishing the prospectus pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
company shall also mention that the prospectus has been approved by the
Securities Board and registered with the Office, and the date thereof.
(8) The covering page of each prospectus shall also mention that such
prospectus has been registered pursuant to this Section and that the Securities
Board or the Office shall not be liable to bear any kind of responsibility in
respect of the matters mentioned therein.
(9) Prior to the approval by the Securities Board of the prospectus of any
company, the concerned company shall make a declaration before the
Securities Board that the provisions of this Act have been complied with; and
the Securities Board may, if it deems necessary, seek opinion of the Office on
that matter.
(10) Other procedures to be fulfilled in publishing the prospectus and
the matters to be set out in the prospectus shall be as mentioned in the
prevailing law on securities.
Liability for matters contained in prospectus: (1) It shall be the duty and
obligation of the concerned company to abide by the matters contained in the
prospectus published under Section (23).
(2) The directors who have signed the prospectus as referred to in Subsection (1) shall be liable for the matters mentioned in that prospectus .
(3) If any published prospectus contains false statements made
maliciously or deliberately and any person sustains any loss or damage by
reason of his/her subscription of securities on the faith of that prospectus, the
directors who have signed that prospectus shall be personally liable to pay
compensation for the actual loss or damage so sustained .
Provided, however, that a promoter who resigns before the decision made by
the company to publish the prospectus or whom on becoming aware of any
false statement in the prospectus, publishes a notice of that matter to the
information of the general public prior to the sale or allotment of securities or
who proves that he/she did not know that the prospectus contained any false
statement shall not be liable to bear such compensation.
Duplicate copies to be issued: (1) If any shareholder or any other person
concerned demands for a duplicate copy of the memorandum of association,
prospectus, annual accounts and audit or directors report or any document
submitted by the company to the Office the concerned company shall provide a
duplicate copy of such document by collecting the fees prescribed in the
articles of association.
Provided, however, that any person whoever may demand for such
document in the case of a public company.
(2) If the concerned company does not provide duplicates of such
documents pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Office shall provide duplicates of
such documents from its records by collecting the prescribed fees.
Seal of company and its use: (1) A company which intends to use a seal in its
transactions shall make the seal in its name in clear legible letters.
(2) The company using the seal as referred to in Sub-section (1), shall
use it in any reports and records to be submitted on its behalf and business
letters to be used in its name, statements of accounts, bills, invoices, requisition
order forms, notices and official publications, negotiable instruments, bills of
exchange, promissory notes, and official documents signed or issued on its
behalf.
(3) If any person fails to indicate the name of the company while signing,
on behalf of the company, the documents mentioned in Sub-section (2), such
person shall be personably liable for the same.

Chapter 4
Shares and Debentures
Face value of shares and application: (1) The face value of shares of a private
company shall be as specified in its articles of association.
(2) The face value of shares of a public company shall be fifty rupees
per share or shall be equivalent to such amount exceeding fifty rupees as is
divisible by the figure ten as provided in the memorandum of association and
articles of association.
(3) In inviting an application by a public company for the subscription
of its shares, no amount exceeding fifty per cent of the face value of each share
shall be demanded with the application.
Provided, however, that in raising capital by a company which has been
in operation since at least three years ago by publishing its audited fiscal
statements for its last three years, at the time of publication of its prospectus,
this provision shall not be applicable.
(4) A person who intends to subscribe the shares of a public company
has to make an application in the format as prescribed.
Allotment of shares: (1) Where a public company invites the general public to
apply for the subscription of its shares it shall allot the shares and give the
shareholders a notice in the format as prescribed, within a maximum period of
three months after the date of closure of share issue.
Provided, however, that in cases where at least fifty percent of the total
shares issued publicly cannot be sold failing a guarantee/underwriting
agreement on the subscription of at least fifty percent of the publicly issued
shares, no shares shall be allotted.
(2) If the company makes an application, explaining the reasons for
failure to allot shares within the time-limit set forth in Sub-section(1), owing to
the circumstance mentioned in the proviso to that Sub-section within seven
days after the expiration of that time-limit, the Office may extend the time
limit for up to three months for the allotment of shares. If the shares cannot be
allotted even within such extended time limit, the company may allot such
shares through negotiations or any other methods.
(3) If the allotment of shares cannot be made even within the time –limit
as referred to in Sub-section (1) or (2) , the amount received for the
subscription of shares as well as an interest thereon, as prescribed, from the day
of expiration of such time-limit to the day of refund of such amount shall be
refunded.
(4) If the funds are insufficient to refund the amount required to be
refunded pursuant to Sub-section (3), the shortfall amount shall be borne by the
promoters personally.
(5) Where the allotment of shares pursuant to Sub-section (1)or (2) is
made discriminatorily or with intent to cause any loss or damage to any
investor may file a petition, setting out the reasons for the same, in the court on
that matter.
(6) If a petition is filed pursuant to Sub-section 5), where any investor
has sustained any loss or damage by reason of the deliberate violation of this
Section by any officer of the company or permission given by such officer to
any one to commit such violation, the court may issue an order for realization
from such officer personally of compensation for such loss or damage as well
as reasonable expenses incurred in the legal action.
Power to issue shares at premium: (1) Any company fulfilling the following
conditions may, with the prior approval of the Office, issue shares at a
premium:
The company has been making profits and distributing
dividends for three consecutive years,
The company’s net worth exceeds its total liabilities,
The company’s general meeting has decided to issue
shares at a premium.
(2) Where the shares are sold at a premium pursuant to Sub-section (1),
a sum in excess of the face value, out of the proceeds thereof, shall be
deposited in a premium account to be opened to that effect.
(3) The company may use the moneys in the account as referred to in
Sub-section (2) in the following acts:
Paying up un-issued share capital to be issued to the
shareholders as fully paid bonus shares,
Providing for the premium payable on redemption of any
redeemable preference shares,
Writing off the preliminary expenses made by the
company,
Bearing or reimbursing the expenses of, or the commission
paid or discount allowed on, any issue of shares of the
company.
In making a request for approval of the Office to issue
shares at a premium pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
audited financial statements for three years shall be
provided to the Office.
Shares with different rights and rights of such shareholders: (1) The
company may, by making provisions to that effect in its memorandum of
association and articles of association, issue various classes of shares with
different rights attached thereto.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in the articles of association of
company, approval of the shareholders of any particular class shall be required
to make any alteration in the rights of those shareholders of that class.
Provided, however, that no alteration may be made in the rights of the
shareholders of any particular class in a manner to adversely affect the rights of
the shareholders of any other class.
(3) If the shareholders representing at least ten percent share of any
particular class who are not satisfied with a decision to make alteration in the
rights attached to the shares of that class pursuant to Subsection (2) file a
petition in the court to have the decision to make such alteration void, the
decision made to make alteration in the rights of the shareholders of such class
shall not be enforced unless and until otherwise decided or ordered by the court.
(4) A petition shall be made pursuant to Sub-section (3) within thirty
days after the decision made to make alteration in the rights attached to the
shares of any particular class; and any decision as referred to in Sub-section(2)
shall not be enforced pending the expiration of that time limit.
(5) If it appears that alteration in the rights conferred to the shareholders
of the class concerned is prejudicial to the rights of the petitioner shareholders,
the court may quash the decision made on the alteration in the rights of the
shareholders of that class.
(6) The board of directors shall submit a proposed resolution on the
alteration in the rights of the shareholders of any particular class pursuant to
Sub-section (2) to the general meeting of the shareholders of the concerned
class; and such resolution has to be adopted as a special resolution by the
general meeting.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, in
privatizing a company fully or partly owned by the Government of Nepal, as a
shareholder, in accordance with the prevailing law on privatization, the
Government of Nepal may have special voting right in making decision on the
following matters, as provided in the articles of association, so long as the
investment to the Government of Nepal is retained in such company:
In making decision on a resolution to relinquish the title to
an undertaking pursuant to Clause (a) of Sub-section (1) of

Section 105,
In making decision on voluntary liquidation of the
company,
In making decision to amalgamate the company into
another company.
Return of shares to be filed with office: (1) A company shall file with the
Office a return of allotments stating the number of shares issued and allotted,
total amount of the shares, the names and addresses of the allotters, and the
amount paid or due and payable on each share, within thirty days after the
allotment of shares.
(2) if any shares have been allotted as fully or partly paid up otherwise
than in cash, the company shall file with the Office a deed constituting the title
of the allotter to the shares together with any contract of sale or a contract for
services or other consideration in respect of which that allotment was made,
and a return stating the number and nominal amount of shares so allotted and
the extent to which they are to be treated as paidup.
Dealing in securities: (1) While issuing its securities to the general public, a
public company shall deal in the securities only through a securities dealer
recognized to do securities transactions including all acts such as the sale,
allotment and recovery of amounts of such securities.
(2) A public company shall file with the Office a copy of an agreement
made by it on the dealing of securities through any body, within seven days
after the date of making of such agreement.
Share certificate: (1) A share certificate in the prescribed format shall be
issued to every shareholder in respect of each share subscribed by him/her,
within two months after the allotment of shares; the share certificate shall bear
the signature of any two out of a director or chief executive of the company or
the company secretary, in the case of a public company, and the signature of
the person as mentioned in the articles of association or consensus agreement,
in the case of a private company, and also bear the seal of the company, if any .
(2) While issuing a share certificate in respect of any shares held jointly
by two or more persons, the share certificate may be issued to any one of them,
by mentioning their names in the certificate.
Provided, however, that, the names of all shareholders shall be
mentioned in the shareholder register.
(3) If a share certificate is lost or destroyed because of a divine act or
otherwise, the shareholder shall give information thereof to the registered
office the company immediately when he/she knows that the share certificate
has been so lost or destroyed because of the divine act or otherwise.
(4) If any application made pursuant to Sub-section (3), the company
shall , if the matter contained in the application seems to be reasonable after
inquiring into all necessary matters relating thereto, issue another share
certificate to the applicant, by collecting the duplicate fees for duplicate copy
as prescribed in the articles of association; and this matter shall also be
recorded in the shareholder register.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, if a
listed company has caused a register to be maintained, pursuant to Sub-section
(6) of Section 46, by the securities registrar authorized to provide securities
deposit service under the prevailing law, provision may be made to issue to the
shareholder a securities deposit passbook or any other certificate certifying
him/her to be a shareholder, instead of a share certificate.
(6) A certificate issued by a company, signed by its competent officer
and under the seal of the company, if any, to be used by it, specifying the
number of shares or debentures held by any shareholder or debenture-holder
shall be prima facie evidence of his/her title to such shares or debentures.
(7) If any company allots any shares or debentures or transfers such
shares or debentures to a representative of a body licensed under the prevailing
law to carry on securities dealings, the provision of Sub-section(1) shall not
apply to such shares or debentures.
Raising loans or issuing debentures: (1) If a public company deems
necessary to raise loans or issue debentures, it may, specifying the reason
therefore, a work plan to be executed from proceeds and budget necessary for
that propose raise loans or issue debentures with or without pledging or
mortgaging its immovable assets.
Provided, however, that no debentures may be issued unless and until an
approval to commence its business is obtained and its issued capital is fully
paid up.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, any
company may, subject to subsection(1) , raise additional loans or issue
additional debentures against the security already furnished by that company
with the already furnished by that company with the previous creditors as a
security from such creditors, within the limit of such security, by clearly
indicating the previous creditors as well as amount of loan (amount) already
obtained.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, the
matters relating to the terms, repayment period and interest of a loan
borrowed or lent by a company shall be governed by a deed or contract
concluded between the creditor and the borrower.
(4) If a company is to raise loans or issue debentures pursuant to Subsection (1) or (2), the company shall give its information, along with the
reasons for the same, to the office.
Procedures for issuing debentures: (1) A public company shall, in issuing
debentures pursuant to this Act, issue debentures after making provision of a
debenture trustee. Such debenture trustee has to be a debenture trustee licensed
by the Securities Board.
(2) The matters relating to the creditor and the borrower, in issuing
debentures with a debenture trustee, shall be as mentioned in an agreement to
be concluded between such trustee and the company.
(3) If the memorandum of association or the articles of association shall
provide that debentures can be converted into shares or such term has been
specified prior to the issuance of debentures, a debentures may be converted
into shares, subject to the share capital related provisions of this Act.
(4) If any debentures are to be converted into shares pursuant to Subsection (3), this matter has to be clearly mentioned in the prospectus.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law, the court
may, if it thinks necessary, issue an order of specific performance to get
performed a contract concluded between a public company and a person in
respect of the subscription of the debentures issued by that company.
Agreement to be concluded between debenture trustee and company: (1)
An agreement has to be concluded between a company issuing debentures and
a debenture trustee acting as a trustee for the protection of the interest of
debenture-holders, in respect of the debentures to be raised by such company.
(2) An agreement to be concluded pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall set
out the following matters:
that the debenture trustee is entitled to carry out, or cause
to be carried out, valuation of the company’s assets,
project analysis or management analysis,
the period of repayment of the principal and interest of
debentures subscribed by the debenture-holder, interest
rate, mode of repayment of the principal and interest,
mode of repayment of the principal and interest, and
matter of conversion of debentures into shares, if there is
such provision,
Matters, relating to a provision made on the lights of other
creditors over the assets of the company and liabilities that
may arise therefrom in the future.
A provision that, in the case of violation or non-fulfillment
of the terms mentioned in the agreement or for any other
reasonable reason, if it is required to take the control of
financial transactions of the company or to take possession
if the security as referred to in the agreement, the
debenture trustee may take in his/her possession the assets
or properties of such company to the property that he has
taken as the security of guarantee or hold the security of
guarantee with himself/herself or sell the same by auction
or in any other appropriate manner,
Procedures for payment by the company of the service
charges and other direct expenses of he debenture trustee,
That the debenture trustee shall not be liable to any loss or
damage caused to the company or the debenture-holder
from any act done by the trustee in that capacity,
That, in the event of occurrence of any circumstances
necessitating the liquidation of the company, the debenture
trustee is entitled to take such legal action as may be taken
in behalf of the debentureholder and exercise the powers
of the debenture holder.
Other necessary matters on the protection of interest of
the debenture-holder.
(3) The debenture trustee may, for the protection of interest of the
debenture-holder, take security of the assets of the company and get such
security registered in his/her name pursuant to the prevailing law.
(4) Prior to the taking of security pursuant to Sub-section (3), the
debenture trustee may, if he/she deems necessary, also carry out, or cause to be
carried out, the calculation of property or assets to taken as security and the
project analysis of management analysis of the company.
(5) After the conclusion of an agreement between a debenture trustee
and a company pursuant to this Section, such company has to obtain the
approval of the debenture, trustee if any.
Inquiry and demand of statements by debenture trustee: Prior to
concluding an agreement with a company to act as a debenture trustee, the
debenture trustee may hold necessary inquiry into, and obtain or demand
statements, notice or information on, the following matters; and the concerned
company has to provide the same if so demanded:
Whether the memorandum of association or article of association of the
company has a provision that it may raise loans or debentures: and if so,
whether the board of directors of the company has powers to make
decision to so raise debentures,
Whether the memorandum of association or articles of association of the
company has a provision that debentures may be raised through a
debentures trustee,
Whether there is a situation that the existing assets of the company can
cover the value of debentures raised,
Matters relating to other creditors and liabilities of the company.
The company’s balance sheet and auditor’s report.
Such other necessary matters as the debenture trustee may consider to be
appropriate.
Company to submit periodic statements to debenture trustee: (1) After an
agreement has been concluded between a company and a debenture trustee
under Section 36, the company has to submit its statements in financial
transactions to the debenture trustee in every six months.
(2) In the event of a change in the management or any kind of change
in the ownership of the company after raising of debentures, the company has
to give information thereof to the debenture trustee within seven days after
such change.
(3) In the event of necessity of any additional statement, notice or
information submitted by the company pursuant to Sub-section(1) or (2), the
debenture trustee may demand such statement, notice or information from the
company; and it shall be the duty of the company to provide the statement,
notice or information so demanded to the debenture trustee.
Rights and liabilities of debenture trustee: (1) If the company violates any of
the terms mentioned in the agreement concluded under Section 36, the
debenture trustee may instruct such company to fulfill such terms as soon as
possible or to make repayment of the principals and interest of the debentureholder within a time limit as specified by him/her.
(2) If it is required to take the financial transaction of the company
under control or to possess the security as referred to in the agreement by
reason of the repayment made under Sub-section (1) or for any other reason,
the debenture trustee may, subject to the prevailing law, take the assets,
properties or securities of such company under his/her control and hold the
assets or properties so possessed in his/her own or sell such assets or properties
by auction or otherwise or deal with the same in other manner.
(3) Following the possession of the assets of the company under Subsection (2), the amount of a debenture-holder shall be repaid out of the
proceeds of sale of the assets. If any amount remains surplus after repayment
of the amount payable to the debenture-holder, the debenture trustee shall
return that amount to the concerned company
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, except in
cases where the debenture trustee him/herself buys the assets taken by the
debenture trustee as the security, if the proceeds of sale of the property which
the debenture trustee has taken as security or possessed be not sufficient to
repay all the amounts to debenture holders, the debenture trustee shall pay the
amounts to debenture-holders on pro rata; and such shortfall amounts shall not
be recovered from the debenture trustee’s property.
(5) Any debenture-holder holding more than fifty percent debentures
may, showing the ground of failure of a debenture trustee to act in the interest
of debenture-holder, make an application to the Securities Board to remove
such debenture trustee.
(6) If, on examining the application made pursuant to Sub-section (5),
the contents appear to be reasonable, the Securities Board may remove such
debenture trustee and arrange for another debenture trustee.
Service charges to be collected by debenture trustee: (1) The debenture
trustee may collect service charge from a company for having acted in the
capacity of debenture trustee. The amount of such service charge shall be as
specified in the agreement concluded between the debenture trustee and the
concerned company.
(2) The debenture trustee may recover from the concerned company
such actual expenses incurred in doing any act on behalf of the company or
debenture-holder or in carrying out valuation, possession or auction sale of the
company’s assets.
Debenture trustee to have rights of debenture-holder: (1) If a company
raising debentures is liquidated or becomes insolvent for any other reasons, the
debenture trustee shall make representation on behalf of the debenture-holder.
(2) In the event of necessity to institute a lawsuit on behalf of the
debenture-holder for the repayment of the principal and interest of such
debenture-holder or otherwise, the debenture trustee shall have the right to
institute the lawsuit on behalf of the debenture-holder.
Sale or pledge of shares or debentures: (1) The share or debenture of a
company may be sold or pledged as good as movable property, subject to this
Act, the memorandum of association and articles of association.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), the promoter
of a company, other than a private company which has not borrowed loan from
any other company, shall not be entitled to sell or pledge any share held by
him/her until the first general meeting of that company is held and a call on the
share issued in his/her name is fully paid up .
(3) where a share or debenture is pledged pursuant to Sub-section(1), the
pledge shall make an application, in such format and along with such fees as
may be prescribed, to the registered office of the company to have the matter
recorded in the register. The applicant shall also submit the deed on pledge as
well as the share or debenture certificate, along with the application to be so
made.
(4) Where an application is made pursuant to Sub-section (3), the
company shall record in the register the execution of such pledge and on
receipt of information on the redemption of the share or debenture so pledged,
the records of such pledge shall be crossed off the register.
Transmission of shares or debentures: (1) If any share or debenture is sold,
subject to Sub-sections(1) and (2) of Section 42, the buyer thereof shall make
an application to the registered office of the company , in such format and
along with such fees as may be prescribed, to have such debenture or share
transmitted to his/her name. The applicant shall also submit, along with such
application, a copy of the deed relating to the sale and purchase of share or
debenture certificate.
(2) If an application is made under Sub-section (1), the company shall
cross off the name of transferor shareholder or debenture holder and enter the
name of the transferee shareholder in the register within fifteen days after the
making of such application.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), if the
prevailing law on securities transactions provides that no deed of transfer is
required to transfer the title to the share or debenture of a company such deed
shall not be required to be produced along with an application to be so made.
(4) If a person who transfers any securities makes an application, also
accompanied by a deed of transfer of share, singed by the purchaser to get the
transfer of any share or debenture recorded, the company shall register the
name of share or debenture transferee in the shareholder register or debentureholder register as if such application was made by the transferee him/herself.
(5) If any person acquires the title to any share or debenture by
operation of any other provision contained in the prevailing law the provision
contained in Sub-section(1), shall not be deemed to prevent the company from
registering such person as a shareholder or debenture-holder.
Refusal to register share or debenture: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 42 or 43, a company may, in the following circumstances,
refuse to record any pledge of a share in the register or to effect transmission of
a share or debenture where it has been disposed of:
If a call on the share has not been paid up,
If such transmission will be contrary to the articles of
association of the company or the agreement concluded
between the shareholders,
If the transfer fee is not furnished along with the
application.
(2) In refusing to record the pledge of a share or debenture in the register
or to effect transmission of a share of debenture under Sub-section(1), the
company shall give information thereof to both the transferor and the transferee
or the ledger and pledge of the share or debenture within fifteen days from the
date of making application.
Other circumstances where shares or debentures may be transmitted: If
any person becomes entitled to the share or debenture holded by any
shareholder or debenture-holder because of his/her death, being insolvent or
otherwise under the prevailing law, and that person so acquiring the title or on
whom the title is so devolved makes an application accompanied by an
evidence thereof, to the company, in such format and accompanied by such
fees as prescribed, the company shall transmit such share or debenture to
him/her.
Provided, however, that notwithstanding that a share has not yet been
transferred to the successor so acquiring the title, if an instrument of transfer of
the share held by the previous shareholder and of his/her other rights over such
share is executed by his/her heir established under the prevailing law, such
transfer shall be deemed to have transferred to such successor.
Shareholder and debenture-holder register: (1) Each company shall
establish a shareholder register and debenture-holder register in the prescribed
format and maintain the same at its registered office.
(2) The following matters concerning each shareholder shall be
mentioned in the shareholder register as referred to in Sub-section (1),
according to the serial number of shares:
Full name and address of the shareholder,
Number of shares subscribed by the shareholder,
Total amount paid by the shareholder and outstanding
amount payable by him/her for the share,
Date of registration of his/her name as the shareholder,
Date when his/her name was struck off,
Name and address of the nominee after the death of the
shareholder, if such nominee is appointed.
(3) The following matters concerning each debenture-holder shall be
mentioned in the debentureholder register as referred to in Sub-section (1),
according to the serial number of debentures:
Full name and address of the debenture-holder,
Number of debentures subscribed by the debenture-holder,
Total
amount
paid by
the debenture-holder
outstanding amount payable by him/her for the debenture,
Date of registration of his/her name as the debentureholder,
Date when the name of the debenture-holder was struck
Name and address of the nominee after the death of the
debenture-holder, if such nominee appointed.
(4) If a shareholder or debenture-holder of a company desires to inspect
the register maintained pursuant to Sub-section (1), the company shall allow
him/her for the same.
Provided, however, that in the case of a public company, the company
may, by publishing a seven-day advance notice in a newspaper with national
circulation, and in the case of a private company, the company may, as
provided in the articles of association or consensus agreement, close inspection
of the register for a maximum period of thirty days at one time, not exceeding
in the aggregate forty-five days in a year.
(5) If any person desires to have a duplicate copy of the shareholder
register, such duplicate copy shall be issued to that person by collecting the
fees as prescribed, in the case of a public company, and such fees as mentioned
in the memorandum of association, articles of association or consensus
agreement, in the case of a private company, except in case where inspection is
closed pursuant to the proviso to Sub-section (4).
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, a
listed company may cause the securities registrar recognized under the
prevailing law to provide securities deposits service to establish and maintain a
register. A copy of the register so maintained shall be kept at the registered
office of the company, prior to giving a notice of the general meeting each year.
The register shall set out the matters mentioned in Sub-sections (2) and (3) .
(7) If a register maintained under Sub-section (6) is found to have
recorded a false matter in a manner to affect the right and interest of a person,
such securities registrar, his/her director, officer and employee shall be liable to
punishment as mentioned in Section 160, and the concerned person shall also
be entitled to have recovered the loss and damage caused to him/her because of
such false record.
Information on title to share: (1) If a company asks any shareholder to
provide information as to what capacity one has obtained the shares with full
voting rights registered in his/her name or whether any other person has
investment in the shares registered in the name of such shareholder and where
there is another person as a the beneficiary of such shares, as to the identity and
nature of the title of that person, it shall be the duty of such shareholder to
provide such information to the company within thirty days.
(2) On receipt of the information sought under Sub-section (1) , the
company shall record opposite the name of the concerned shareholder, in the
register the date of demand of such information, date of receipt of information
and the contents of information received and provide the Office with
information pertaining there to within seven days.
Address of shareholder: (1) Unless otherwise altered by a notice, the address
of a shareholder mentioned in the shareholder register shall be considered to be
his/her real address.
(2) In the event of change of address of a shareholder, a written notice of
the new address has to be given to the registered office of the company
immediately after such change.
(3) On receipt of the notice as referred to in Sub-section (2), the director
or company secretary shall record the address so changed in the shareholder
register.
(4) When a notice is sent to the address supplied by a shareholder, a
notice required to be sent by a company to the shareholder under this Act shall,
unless otherwise proved, be deemed to have been duly sent, and received by
the concerned shareholder.
Index of shareholders: (1) Unless the shareholder register is in such form as in
itself to clearly constitute an index of the names of shareholders, every
company having more than fifty shareholders shall prepare and keep a separate
index of the names of its shareholders.
(2) In the event of any alteration in the shareholders register, necessary
alteration shall also be made in the index prepared under Sub-section (1) within
thirty days after the date of such alteration in the register.
(3) The index of shareholders shall be kept in such a manner that
necessary information in respect of each shareholder can be readily found from
the shareholder register.
(4) The index of shareholders shall be kept together with the shareholder
register.
(5) If a company fails to comply with this Section, the company shall be
deemed to have failed to comply with this Act.
Substantial shareholders: (1) If any person subscribes ordinary shares with
full voting rights that are five percent or more of the paid up capital of any
public company of which shares that person has held in his/her name or
through his/her agent, that person shall be deemed to have his/her substantial
shareholding in such company.
Provided, however, that in the case of a company having the paid up capital of
more than two hundred fifty million rupees, any person shall be deemed to
have the substantial shareholding despite that such person has subscribed one
percent or more of the total paid-up capital of such company.
(2) A substantial shareholder of every public company shall give the
company information setting out his/her name, address as well as full
particulars of the shares registered in his/her or his/her agent’s name, within
thirty five days after the knowledge of being a substantial shareholder of that
company.
(3) If a person ceases to be a substantial shareholder of any public
company, that person shall give the company information setting out his/her
name, the date on which he ceases to possess the status of a substantial
shareholder of that company and other particulars as well as the reason why
he/she has ceased to be a substantial shareholder, within thirty-five days after
the date of knowledge of that matter.
(4) Every public company shall maintain a separate register for the
purposes of Subsection (1), (2) and (3).
Inventory of shares, debentures and loans: (1) Every company shall prepare
and maintain an inventory of the existing shareholders and debenture -holders
and persons who ceased to be shareholders or debenture-holders as at thirty
days prior to the holding of the........∝ annual general meeting.
(2) The inventory as referred to in Sub-section (1) spell outs, inter alia,
the following particulars.
Authorized capital and number of shares of the company,
Issued share capital of the company,
Paid-up capital of the company,
Calls made on every share,
Total amount of installments paid,
Total amount due and recoverable,
Total amount paid on share and debentures as brokerage,
In the event of forfeiture of any shares, total number of
such shares, reasons for forfeiture and date thereof,
∝ Deleted by the Some Nepal Act (Amendment) Act, 2064
Loans borrowed from any bank, financial institution or
any other person or guarantee furnished by the company,
Names and addresses of the existing directors.
(3) The inventory referred to in Sub-section (1) shall be signed by at
least one director and be submitted to the Office within 30 days after the date at
which the annual general meeting of the company is held and, in the case of a
company not holding the annual general meeting within one year after the date
at which the company has obtained permission to carry on such business as to
require permission of the concerned body pursuant to the prevailing law, if the
company carries on such business, and after the date of registration where such
permission is not required; and if there is any alteration in the inventory once it
is submitted pursuant to Sub-section (2) , only the details of such alteration can
be submitted.
(4) If any alteration is made in the inventory, as referred to in sunsection (1), of a company not holding the general meeting details thereof shall
be sent to the Office within six months of such alteration.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, if any
company mentions the details as referred to in Sub-section(1), as well, in the
report required to be submitted pursuant to Section 78, such company shall not
be required to send a separate inventory to this Office under this Section .
Lien on shares: A company may attach a share registered in the name of a
shareholder and dividends payable thereon, as well, for all moneys due and
payable by him/her to the company in respect of that share or for all moneys
due and payable by him/her to the company under the prevailing law and
recover such moneys by deducting the same from the dividends.
Payment of amount for shares: (1) An amount for a share shall be paid up
within the period of a call made in accordance with the articles of association.
(2) In making a call pursuant to Sub-section (1), a company shall send
every shareholder a written notice, in the prescribed format, specifying a time45
limit of at least thirty days and the installment payable by him/her, the place
and time for payment. A public company shall also publish such notice, for at
least three times, in a daily newspaper with national circulation.
(3) If a shareholder fails to pay the sum called and payable in respect of
the share within the period as referred to in Sub-section(2), a notice shall be
sent to the concerned shareholder, giving an additional period of three months
after the date of expiration of that period, and specifying clearly that if
payment is made within that period, it shall be accepted, along with interest at
the prescribed rate and if that shareholder fails to make payment even within
that period, his/her share shall be liable to be forfeited. In the case of a public
company, such notice shall also be published in a daily newspaper with
national circulation for at least three times. In the installment called is not paid
even within the time-limit as mentioned in that notice, the company may forfeit
all or the remaining shares after retaining the number of shares as fully paid up
to the extent of the amount paid up on the shares in respect of which the
company has given such notice or also to the extent of the amount of dividends,
if any, attached in respect of such shares.
Provided, however, that where the company has already undergone liquidation
or insolvency prior to the forfeiture of shares, any amount due and payable in
respect of the shares liable to accordance with the prevailing law.
(4) Where any share is forfeited under Sub-section (3), the board of
directors may refund the amount already paid up in respect of the share so
forfeited and the amount equal to the dividends, if any attached in respect of
such share, or issue the share to the extent covered by such amount; and where
the amount is to be refunded, it has to be refunded within three months after the
forfeiture of share.
(5) In the event of failure to make refund within three months pursuant
to subsection (4), interest chargeable on such amount after the expiration of
that period shall also be paid.
(6) The shares forfeited under Sub-section (3) may be sold or otherwise
disposed of in such manner as the board of directors may, subject to the articles
of association, thinks fit.
(7) A company which has been making profits for a period of three
consecutive years or more may, by a special resolution adopted at its general
meeting determines that a call may not be made in respect of certain portion of
its share capital not called on except in the case of liquidation or insolvency of
the company.
(8) After a special resolution has been adopted under Sub-section (6), a
call may not be made on the amount of share capital that is yet to be called on
as mentioned in that resolution except where the general meeting, by adopting
another special resolution, decides to make such call and except in the case of
liquidation or insolvency of the company.
Payment of amount of shares held jointly: (1) Every partner shall pay the
amount of call on the shares held jointly in proportion to his /her ownership.
(2) Except where there exists a duly executed deed indicating specific
portion owned by each partner in the shares held pursuant to Sub-section (1),
all the holders of such shares shall be deemed to have equal ownership there
Ownership of shares and debentures: If a dispute arises about the ownership
of any share or debenture issued by any company, the person whose name is
registered in the share or debenture register maintained by the company shall,
unless otherwise proved be regarded as the owner of such share or debenture.
Power of company to alter its share capital: (1) Subject to the provisions
contained in its articles of association, any company may, by adopting a special
resolution at its general meeting, make alteration in its share capital as follows:
By increasing its authorized share capital by such amount
as it thinks expedient by issuing new shares,
By consolidating or dividing all or any of its share capital
into shares of larger or smaller amount,
By canceling the shares which, at the date the adopting of
the resolution in that behalf, have not been taken or agreed
to be taken by any person or the shares forfeited pursuant
to Sub-section (3) of Section 53 and diminishing the
amount of its share capital by the amount of the shares so
canceled.
(2) When a special resolution for altering the capital pursuant to subsection (1) is adopted, the memorandum of association and articles of
association of the concerned company shall be deemed to have ...... ∝ been
amended to that extent.
(3) A submission, accompanied by the prescribed fees shall be made to
the Office for the record of the resolution adopted pursuant to Sub-section (1)
and the amendment to the memorandum of association and articles of
association; and the Office shall accordingly record the alteration made in the
capital of the company and the amendment made to the memorandum of
association and articles of association and give information thereof to the
company within seven days after such submission.
(4) A cancellation of shares, if any, made in pursuance of Clause (c) of
Sub-section (1) shall not be deemed to have been made for purposes of the
reduction of share capital of a company.
(5) If a company is required to increase its issued capital to the extent of
its authorized capital, it may increase such capital by adopting an ordinary
resolution at the general meeting.
(6) If a public company is required to increase its share capital under
Sub-section (5) and issue its shares publicly, it shall fulfill the procedures
specified in this Act and the prevailing law on securities.
∝ Deleted by the Some Nepal Act (Amendment) Act, 2064
Provided, however, that in so issuing bonus shares and right shares that they
may be subscribed by its existing shareholders and employees only or issuing
shares pursuant to Sub-section (9), such company shall not be required to fulfill
such procedures.
(7) A public company shall publish a notice on the issue of right shares,
which may be subscribed by the existing shareholders only, in a daily
newspaper of national circulation for at least three consecutive times prior to
fifteen days of the issue of such shares.
(8) The existing shareholders shall have the first right to subscribed the
shares issued under Sub-section (7) in proportion to their respective
shareholding.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (8), no
shareholder of a company existing for the time being shall have the first right
over the following shares to be issued by the company:
Shares issued by the company for any consideration other
than cash,
Shares issued to any person under any right or facility
provided in accordance with the terms of an agreement
concluded with the company,
Shares issued under an employee share scheme,
Shares issued in accordance with an agreement concluded
between the company and its creditors,
Shares existed on converting preference shares into
ordinary shares or debentures into shares by the company,
Shares issued in accordance with an agreement between
the concerned parties in the course of management of the
company, restructuring of its capital or loan or in the
course of implementation of a restructuring program
agreed upon between the relevant parties in accordance
with the prevailing law on insolvency or in the course of
implementation of a program of conversion of a public
company into another public company.
(10) No share capital shall be increased or bonus share issued by
revaluating the assets of a company other than from profits made by the
company or funds created out of profits.
(11) In issuing shares under this Section, a time limit of at least thirtyfive days shall be given to the existing shareholders to subscribe the shares. If
such shareholders fail either to subscribe the shares or to sell or transfer the
right to subscribe shares to any one else within the said time limit or, such
shares may be sold in any other manner as decided by the board of directors of
the company.
Reduction of share capital: (1) If a company intends to reduce its share
capital , it may, by adopting a special resolution to that effect at its general
meeting, reduce its share capital by obtaining approval of the Court and making
necessary amendment to or alteration in the memorandum of association and
articles of association, accordingly.
(2) On receipt of approval of the Court pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
company may reduce its share capital as follows:
By reducing the capital to such amount as has been paid
up where calls for payment of amount on shares are not
fully paid up,
By paying back any paid-up share capital,
By devaluating the face value of shares where the
company has sustained a big loss or suffered a natural
calamity.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (2), a company
which has already become insolvent in accordance with the prevailing law shall
not reduce its capital pursuant to this Section.
Procedures for obtaining approval of Court to reduce share capital: (1)
Where a company has adopted a special resolution for reducing its share capital
pursuant to Section 57, it shall make a petition to the Court for an order
confirming the reduction.
(2) Where a petition is made pursuant to Sub-section (1), the concerned
company shall, prior to the hearing of such petition, publish a public notice in a
daily newspaper of national circulation for at least three times, setting out the
venue and date of hearing on the reduction of share capital of the company.
(3) Every person who is entitled to any debt or claim under the
prevailing law at the time of commencement of the winding up or insolvency
of a company shall be entitled to submit his/her claim and objection to the
reduction of share capital of the company.
(4) The director or company secretary of a company shall, as ordered by
the Court, submit to the Court a real and true list of creditors of the company, if
any, setting out, inter alias, their names, addresses and amount of debt
repayable to each of them, at the commencement of hearing of the petition for
reducing the capital of the company .
(5) Irrespective of whether the creditors whose debts are yet to be
discharged or determined, out of the creditors whose names are entered on the
list submitted pursuant to Sub-section (4), do or do not consent to the reduction
of capital in the case where the company admits the full amount of the debts or
claims made by the creditors, or though not admitting it, agrees to make
provision of moneys required to pay such amount and makes required
provision for the same by executing a bond undertaking to pay the full amount
within a certain date, then the Court may issue order confirming the reduction
of the share capital .
(6) In taking action for approval on a proposed reduction of share capital
which involves either the diminution of any liability in respect of unpaid share
capital or the paying back to an shareholder of any amount paid for shares, the
Court may, if, having regard to the circumstances and available evidence, it
thinks proper so to do, direct that the provisions of Sub-section (3) or (4) shall
not apply to any specific creditor.
(7) If the list of creditors submitted pursuant to subsection (4) is found
to contain any false statement or omission, the director of the company who
submits such list and the officer who signs such list shall be liable to
punishment under this Act.
Provided, however, that if the officer who signs such list proves that any
omission or mistake was made without his/her knowledge or immediately when
he/she knew such omission or mistake, he gave information to the Court for the
rectification of such omission or mistake, prior to the making of an order by the
Court under this Section or he exercised all reasonable care to avoid such
omission or mistake, he shall not be liable to that punishment.
(8) If the Court is satisfied, with respect to the creditors who under Subsection (1) are entitled to object to the resolution on reduction of capital, that
either their consent to the reduction has been obtained or their debts or claim
have been discharged or have been determined and are at the state of discharge,
or have been secured, it may make an order confirming the reduction,
specifying appropriate alters and conditions.
(9) Where the Court makes an order pursuant to Sub-section (8), it may,
if it thinks proper so to do, order directing that the concerned company, of
which resolution to reduce capital has been co confirmed, shall, for a specified
periods, add to its names the last words thereof the words “ capital reduced”
and publish necessary notice with a view to giving information to the general
public about the reasons and causes for such reduction and other important
information in regard thereto .
(10) Where, pursuant to Sub-section (9) , a company is ordered to add
to its name the words “capital reduced”, those words shall, until the expiration
of the period specified by the Court, be deemed to be an integral part of the
name of the company.
(11) The contents of the terms contained in an order issued by the Court,
pursuant to this Section, in the course of confirming a resolution for the
reduction of capital shall be deemed to have ipso facto been incorporated in the
memorandum of association and articles of association of the company; and the
memorandum of association and articles of association shall be deemed to have
been amended to that extent.
(12) Any director who knowingly conceals, hides or holds back the
name of any creditor who, under this Section, is entitled to object to the
resolution for reducing capital or knowingly prepares or submits a false
statement on the amount of loan or clam or liability or conceals, hides or holds
back such loan or liability or prepares or causes to prepare a false statement or
any officer or employee of the company who abets to such act shall be liable to
punishment under this Act.
(13) Where the share capital of a company is reduced pursuant to this
Section, the director or company secretary of that company shall mention and
authenticate that matter in each share certificate issued by such company.
Liability of shareholders in respect of reduced share capital: Except as
otherwise provided for in this Section, a shareholder of the company, past or
present, shall not be liable, in respect of any share mentioned in the order issue
by the Court confirming the reduction of share capital, to pay any amount
exceeding the difference between the amount actually paid on the share or the
reduced amount, id any, which is deemed to have been paid thereon, as the case
may be , and the fixed amount of such share.
Provided, however, that where the list of creditors entitled to object to the
reduction of share capital submitted to the Court omits any such creditor and,
after an order confirming the reduction of capital of the company has been
made, the company is unable to pay the amount of debt of such creditor, the
shareholder of the company shall be bound to pay the amount as mentioned in
Sub-section (3) or (4) .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to Sub-section (1),
where the list submitted to the Court omits the name or any claim of a creditor
because of a fault or negligence of his/her own, the shareholders shall not be
bound to pay such amount.
(3) A person who was a shareholder of a company at the date of issue by
the Court of an order confirming the resolution for reducing the capital of the
company shall be liable to pay an amount not exceeding the amount which he
would have been liable to pay if the company had undergone insolvency and
commenced insolvency proceedings on the day immediately before the said
date.
(4) If a company is insolvent, and where an application is made by a
creditor whose name is said to be omitted from the list of creditors submitted
to the Court , along with the proof of omission of his/her name, the Court may,
if it thinks fit, settle a list of shareholders who are liable to pay to the company
the amount required for the repayment of loan of such creditor and issue an
order to make calls on shares held by the shareholders settled on such list as if
they were ordinary contributors in an insolvency process of the company.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, no
share holder shall be liable to pay an amount in excess of the face value of a
share at the time of the subscription of such share by him/her.
Directors to be responsible in the case o f loss of net worth of company: (1)
If the net worth of a public company is reduced to half the paid–up capital or
less than that the directors shall prepare an appropriate strategy for the interest
of the company and shareholders, as well, within thirty five days of the
knowledge of this matter, and present a separate resolution thereon at the
general meeting toe held immediately after the knowledge of such matter.
Provided, however, that where approval of the general meeting is required to
implement such strategy, the extra-ordinary general meeting shall be called
promptly.
(2) The directors of company who fail to prepare strategy or to present a
resolution at the general meeting pursuant to Sub-section (1) or who knowingly
permit the existence of the situation where such meeting is not called shall be
liable to punishment under this Act.
(3) If it is held that the net worth of company has been reduced as
mentioned in Sub-section (1) as a result of mala fide intention or malicious
recklessness of any director, the director who commits such act shall also be
liable to pay compensation for the same.
Prohibition on purchase by company of its own shares: (1) No company
shall purchase its own shares (buy-back) or lend money against security of its
own shares.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), in the
following circumstances, a company may buy back its shares out of its free
reserves available for being distributed as dividends, by giving information to
the Office:
Where the shares issued by the company are fully paid up;
Where the shares issued by a public company have been
listed in the Securities Board;
Where the buy-back of shares is authorized by the articles
of association of the concerned company;
Where a special resolution has been adopted at the general
meeting of the concerned company authorizing the buyback;
Where the ratio of the debt owed by the company is not
more than twice the capital and general reserve fund after
buy-back of shares;
Explanation: For the purposes of this Clause, “debt”
means all amounts of secured or unsecured debts
borrowed by a company.
where the value of shares to be bought back by a company
is not more than twenty percent of the total paid up capital
and general reserve fund of that company;
Where the buy-back of shares is not in contravention of
the directives issued by the Office in this respect.
(3) A resolution to be presented at the general meeting pursuant to
Clause (d) of Sub-section (2) shall state the following matters:
The reason and necessity for the buy-back of shares;
A statement of the evaluation of possible impacts of the
financial situation of the concerned as a result of the buyback of shares,
The class and number of shares intended to be bought
back;
The maximum or minimum amount required to buy back
shares as referred to in Clause (c) and financial source of
such amount;
The time limit for the buy-back of shares;
The mode of the buy-back of shares;
Such other necessary matters as specified by the Office
and as required to be disclosed under the prevailing law, in
respect of the buy-back of shares.
(4) Where a special resolution as referred to in Sub-section (3) is
adopted by the general meeting, the concerned company may buy back its
shares in any of the following manners within a period of twelve months of the
adoption of that resolution:
Purchasing from the stock exchange;
Purchasing from the concerned employee of the company
the shares allotted to him/her,
Purchasing
existing
shareholders
proportionate basis.
(5) Where a company buys back its own shares pursuant to Sub-section
(4), it shall file with the Office a return containing the number of shares bought
back, amount paid for the same and other necessary details within thirty days of
the date of such buy-back.
(6) There shall be established a separate capital redemption reserve fund,
to which a sum equal to the nominal value of the shares bought back pursuant
to Sub-section (4) shall be transferred; and the amount of such fund shall be
maintained as if it were the paid-up capital .
(7) Where a company buys back its shares pursuant to Sub-section (4), it
shall cancel the shares so bought back within one hundreds twenty days of the
date of such buy-back .
(8) Once a company buys back any class of shares pursuant to this
Section, the company shall not re-issue the shares of that class, except for the
issue of bonus shares or payment of its liability, prior to the expiration of two
years after such buy-back.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, no
public company shall buy back its shares in a manner that such minimum
number of shareholders or minimum paid–up capital as required to be
maintained by that company becomes less or lower.
(10) Other conditions where a company cannot buy back its shares and
other terms required to be complied with in the buying back of its shares shall
be as prescribed.
Prohibition on providing loan or financial assistance by company to
purchase its own shares: No company shall provide any loan or financial
assistance of any kind to any person for purchasing its own shares or the shares
of its holding company or getting entitlement too such shares in any manner.
Provided, however, that nothing contained in this Section shall prevent a
company from providing loans to any employees of the company to purchase
the fully paid up shares of that company or its holding company or acquire
ownership over such share s in any manner, under a scheme of selling shares to
its employees.
To obtain approval for commencing business: (1) No public company
incorporated under this Act shall commence its business without obtaining the
approval to carry on its business.
(2) A public company shall make an application, along with the
evidence showing the full payment of calls on the shares, out of the amount of
shares undertaken to be subscribed by its prompters, to the office for getting
approval pursuant to Sub-section (1)
(3) Where an application is made pursuant to Sub-section (2) and it so
proved that calls on the shares, out of the amount of shares undertaken to the
Office shall grant approval for carrying on the business.
Provided, however, that if the amount paid up on shares is less than the amount
mentioned in Sub-section (1) of section 11, the Office shall not grant such
approval.
(4) without obtaining the approval to commence business pursuant to
Sub-section(2), there shall not be carried out any act of publishing the except
those acts such as convening the extraordinary general meeting, meeting of the
board of directors and management of the company.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (2), where in the
case of a company carrying on any specific business, the competent regulatory
body empowered to regulate such business under the prevailing law has, while
granting a license, specified any terms and conditions to be complied with prior
to the commencement of such business, no approval to commence business
shall be granted unless and until an evidence showing the compliance with such
terms and conditions is submitted.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, a
private company may commence its transactions immediately upon receipt of
the certificate of registration with the Office.
Provided, however, that where an approval is to be obtained from the
concerned body pursuant to the prevailing law to carry on any specific
transactions, the company shall commence its transactions only after obtaining
such approval.
Prohibition on issue or sale of shares at a discount: (1) A company shall not
issue or sell its shares at a discount.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section(1), a company
may, on the following conditions, issue or sell shares at a discount by adopting
a special resolution at the general meeting to that effect, not being less than the
percentage specified in that resolution:
In issuing or selling shares pursuant to a capital
restructuring scheme of the company,
In issuing or selling shares pursuant to a scheme of
converting loans borrowed by the company into shares
with the consent of creditors;
In issuing or selling shares pursuant to an employee share
scheme;
In issuing shares on such other conditions as approved by
the Office.
Preference shares: (1) A company may issue preference shares as provided for
in this Act, memorandum of association or articles of association.
(2) Except as provided in the articles of association, no shares issued
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be converted into ordinary shares.
(3) In issuing preference shares pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
following maters, inter alia, shall be disclosed:
Whether preference is given to receive dividends against
ordinary shares;
Percentage of dividends receivable by preference
shareholders;
Whether dividends get cumulated every year (cumulative)
or profits are distributed only in a year wherein profit is
made (non-cumulative);
Whether preference is given while paying amount of share
in the event of liquidation of company;
Whether voting right is attached there to; and if voting
right is attached, whether such right is available only in the
case of preference share or also in other matters;
Whether voting right is available also in other matters
pursuant to Clause (e) , the proportion to which such right
is exercisable;
Whether preference shares can be converted into ordinary
shares;
Whether the amount of preference shares can be redeemed
(redeemable) or cannot be redeemed (irredeemable) after a
certain period;
Whether, in redeeming preference shares, premium is
payable on redemption.
(4) Where any redeemable shares are issued, the shares shall not be
redeemed unless they are fully paid.
(5) No amount of preference shares shall be redeemed except out of
profits which would otherwise be available for dividend or out of the proceeds
of a fresh issue of shares made by the company for the purposes of the
redemption.
(6) Where a premium is payable on the redemption of any redeemable
preference shares, there shall be provided for a separate fund out of the profits
of the company or out of the company’s shares premium account, for the
purposes of redemption of such shares.
(7) Except in cases where any redeemable preference shares are
redeemed out of the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares pursuant to sun-section
(5) , while redeeming preference shares pursuant to this Act, a capital
redemption reserve account shall be established and a sum equal to the nominal
amount of the shares redeemed shall be transferred to that account, out of
profits which would otherwise have been available for dividend.
(8) The capital redemption reserve account established pursuant to Subsection (7) shall be maintained as if it were the paid–up capital.
(9) After the completion of the redemption of any preference shares
redeemed pursuant to this Section, such shares shall be deemed to have, ipso
facto, been cancelled.
(10) A company shall while redeeming any preference shares, follow
such terms and procedures as provided by the articles of association of the
company, subject to this Section; and such redemption of preference shares
shall not be taken as reducing the amount of authorized share capital of the
company.
(11) Where a company has redeemed or is about to redeem any
preference shares, it shall have power to issue new shares up to the nominal
amount of the shares so redeemed or to be redeemed.
(12) Where a company has redeemed any preference shares, the
company shall give information thereof to the Office within one month of such
redemption; and on receipt of such information, the Office shall record such
information in the company register.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, a
company may issue new shares to its shareholders as fully paid bonus shares,
out of the capital redemption reserve funds established pursuant to Sub-section
Restriction on minor and person disqualified under law to make contract
to be promoter: (1) A minor who has not attained the age of sixteen years
and a person who is not qualified to make contract under the law shall not be
eligible to become the promoter of a company.
Provided, however, that this Section shall not be deemed to prevent a minor or
a person who is disqualified under the law to make contract from acquiring the
title to the shares of a company subscribed by the promoter, by virtue of
succession or operation of law.
(2) Where any minor or any person who is disqualified under the law to
make contract is to purchase or sell any shares or debentures of any company,
the father, mother or husband or wife or legally appointed protector or guardian
of such person shall do so.

Chapter 5
Meetings of Company
General meetings of company: (1) The general meetings of a company shall
be as follows.
Annual general meeting, and
Extra-ordinary general meeting.
(2) A public company shall send a notice specifying the place, date and
agenda of meeting to every shareholder at the address supplied by that
shareholder to the company, in advance of at least twenty one days to hold the
annual general meeting, and in advance of at least fifteen days to hold the
extraordinary general meeting . A notice thereof shall also be published at
least twice in a national daily newspaper.
Provided, however, that while calling any general meeting which has been
adjourned, if such meeting is not transacting any new agenda, a notice of that
meeting published in a national daily newspaper in advance of at least seven
days shall be deemed to have been duly given.
(3) No decision shall be taken in any general meeting on any matter
which has not been notified in advance pursuant to Sub-section (2), except in
the following circumstances:
Except as otherwise provided in the other sections of this
Act, If the shareholders representing sixty seven per cent
of the total shares of the company who are entitled to vote
at the general meeting, attend in person or by proxy and
vote in favor of taking a decision on any matter,
If the matter was already notified for being transacted in
any general meeting which has been adjourned.
(4) Except in cases where the Office gives prior approval to hold the
general meeting elsewhere, the general meeting of a public company shall be
held either at the district where the registered office of such company is
situated or at such place adjoining to the district of registered office as is
convenient to most shareholders .
(5) A list indicating the name, address of the existing shareholders of the
company and the number of shares held by them shall be kept at the meeting
venue for inspection by the shareholders.
(6) The matters included in the agenda sent along with a notice of the
general meeting shall be discussed and decided first at that meeting.
(7) The person chairing the general meeting may adjourn the meeting as
required. Any matter which is notified, pursuant to this Act, before or after the
day of holding the adjourned general meeting may be discussed and decided in
such adjourned meeting.
(8) The original meeting and the adjourned meeting shall have the same
powers. A resolution adopted at the adjourned meeting shall be deemed to be
adopted on the date of holding that adjourned meeting.
(9) Where any corporate body has purchased shares in a company, a
person appointed by such corporate body shall be entitled to attended and vote
at the general meeting of the company, on behalf of such body.
(10) The proceedings at any general meeting shall not be void or invalid
merely for reason of the accidental omission to give notice to any shareholders
of any listed company or the non-receipt by any shareholder of notice sent at
the address which he has supplied to such company.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section,
matters pertaining to the general meeting of a private company and procedures
thereof shall be as provided in the articles of association or the consensus
agreement. Failing such provision, the provisions of this Act shall apply.
(12) Other provisions relating to the procedures of general meeting shall
be as contained in the articles of association of a company.
Directors required to be present: Every director of a company shall be
present in the general meeting as far as possible.
Legality of meeting: Before every general meeting commences, the
shareholders present therein shall ascertain whether it has been convened in
accordance with this Act and the articles of association; and a general meeting
shall be deemed to have been duly called even if any other law has not been
observed with respect thereto, provided a notice has been sent to all
shareholders pursuant to Sub-section(2) of Section 67 and the meeting attended
by the required quorum as referred to in Section 73 agrees to hold it .
Cases where attendance or voting in meeting is restricted: (1) No person
shall be entitled to attend and vote in any general meeting, in the capacity of a
shareholder, either in person or by proxy on any discussion to be held in
respect of any terms and conditions entered into or to be entered into between
him/herself and the company.
(2) No director or his/her partner or his/her proxy shall be entitled to
vote on any discussion to be held at any General Meeting in respect of the
responsibility for any act done or omitted to be done or done wrongfully by
him/her or in respect of his/her own appointment, dismissal, transfer or
confirmation, with respect to the provision of , or reduction or increment in
remuneration, allowance or bonus or in respect of any agreement, contract or
arrangement regarding his/her employment or anything in which his/her
interest or concern is involved.
(3) Any shareholder who has not paid calls on the shares shall not be
entitled to attend and vote in the general meeting.
(4) Where any shareholder appoints a director of the concerned
company as his/her proxy pursuant to Sub-section(2) of Section 71, such
director shall not be entitled to vote in the general meeting ,as a proxy of any
one , on any matter in which his/her interest or concern is involved or on the
matter of his/her appointment.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the prevailing law,
where a bank or financial institution incorporated under the prevailing law,
which institutes legal action against a shareholder, who has borrowed a loan
from such bank or financial institution against the pledge or security of the
shares held by him/her, for his/her default in repaying the loan, writes to the
concerned company to prevent him/her from exercising voting right in respect
of shares, then the company shall prevent such shareholder from exercising
voting right in respect of the shares held by him/her for a period until he/she
repays the loan.
Right to vote in general meeting: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act
or the articles of association of a company, only the person whose name is
registered as a shareholder in the shareholder register shall, subject to Section
70, be entitled to attend the general meeting and cast votes at the rate of one
vote for each share held by him/her.
(2) Except in cases where the articles of association of a company
prohibit the proxy of a shareholder from exercising the right to vote, any
shareholder may, subject to this Section , appoint another person as his/her
proxy to attend the general meeting and vote instead of him/herself.
(3) Subject to Sub-section (1) or (2) , where a shareholder who is
entitled to vote is not able to personally attend the meeting, he/she may appoint
a proxy to vote in his/her stead, by an instrument of proxy executed in the
prescribed format and signed by him/her and the proxy so appointed shall be
entitled to attend or vote in the meeting , subject to the provisions contained in

Section 72.
(4) where two or more persons jointly hold any shares, only the vote cast
or instrument of proxy executed by the partner appointed by such partners or
by the proxy appointed by that partner pursuant to Sub-section (2),and failing
such appointment of any partner, by the partner whose name appears first in
the serial order, out of the partners, in the shareholder register maintained
pursuant to Section 46 shall be valid.
Provision on voting in election of director: (1) Except as otherwise provided
in the articles of association, on a poll in election of directors, every
shareholder shall be entitled to cast such number of votes as may be set after
multiplying the number of shares held by him/her by the number of directors
to be appointed; and the director who casts such votes may cast all his/her votes
for a single candidate or may cast votes in a manner that his/her votes are
divided for more than one candidate as indicated by him/her.
(2) A corporate body entitled to appoint a director pursuant to this Act
or articles of association may appoint directors in proportion too its
shareholding, and in such a case, it shall but be entitled to cast vote in the
election.
Provided, however, that a corporate body which is not able to appoint even a
single director in proportion to the number of shares and the total number of
directors or which fails to appoint a director in exercise of the power conferred
by this Sub-section may, like other shareholder, take part in the election of
directors representing shareholders, cast vote or file candidacy up to the
number of directors that can be elected in proportion to the shares held by that
body in such election.
Quorum: (1) A quorum for the general meeting of a private company shall be
as specified in the articles of association of such company.
(2) Unless the articles of association of a public company provides for a
larger number for the quorum, no proceedings of the meeting of the public
company shall be conducted unless at least three shareholders of the total
shareholders, representing more than fifty per cent of the total number of
allotted shares of that company, are present either in person or by proxy.
(3) Where a meeting cannot be held because of quorum as referred to in
Sub-section (2), and the meeting is called next time by giving a notice of at
least seven days, nothing shall prevent the holding of such a meeting if at least
three shareholders, representing twenty five percent of the total number of
allotted shares of the company, are present either in person or by proxy.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, in the
case of a company incorporated under the proviso to Sub-section (2), of

Section 3 or a company incorporated under Sub-section(1) of Section 173, the
presence of three shareholders as mentioned in Sub-section(2) or (3) shall not
be mandatory.
Discussion and decision: (1) A general meeting shall be chaired by the
Chairperson of board of directors and, in his/her absence, by the person
nominated by the directors from amongst themselves.
(2) Every matter to be discussed in a general meeting shall be presented
in the form of resolution. The chairperson of the meeting shall declare whether
a resolution has been adopted or not.
(3) The opinion of majority of the shareholders present in the meeting
shall be deemed to be the decision of that meeting on every matter put to the
vote. Such voting may be taken in such manner including a show of hands,
voice voting, division of shareholders in groups or poll (use of ballet paper) as
well as other appropriate method as prescribed by the Chairperson.
Provided, however, that in the case of a special resolution, the resolution shall
be deemed to have been adopted by the meeting only if the shareholders
representing seventy five per cent shares out of the shareholders present in the
meeting vote in favour of the resolution.
(4) If the votes are evenly divided for and against at a general meeting,
the Chairperson of the meeting may exercise the casting vote.
Provided, however, that the Chairperson shall not be deprived of the right to
vote in the capacity of shareholder.
Minutes to be kept: (1) Every company shall keep minutes of the proceedings
of general meeting, by making entries thereof in a separate book; and the
minutes shall be signed by the chairperson of the meeting concerned and by the
company secretary, if any. In the case of a company which has no company
secretary, the minutes shall be signed by the Chairperson of the meeting
concerned and by a representative of shareholders appointed by a majority of
the general meeting.
(2) While keeping the minutes as referred to in Sub-section (1), matters
such as the manner in which the notice of the meeting was issued, the number
of shareholders present, the percentage of representation of the total shares ,
the result of voting, if any, shall all be set out in the minutes.
(3) The minutes set down pursuant to this Section shall be sent to the
shareholders within thirty days of the holding of the general meeting.
Provided, however, that if any company publishes the minutes in a
national daily newspaper, it need not send the same to the shareholders.
(4) The minutes of proceedings of the general meeting kept pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall be kept at the registered office of the company. If any
shareholder wishes to inspect such minutes during office hours, the company
secretary or such other employee as designated by the company shall allow
such inspection.
(5) If any shareholder wishes to get a copy of any minutes of the general
meeting, the company shall provide such copy by collecting such fees as
specified by its articles of association.
Annual general meeting: (1) Every public company shall hold its first annual
general meeting within one year after it is permitted to commence its business,
and thereafter it shall hold the annual general meeting every year within six
months after the expiry if its financial year.
(2) If any public company fails to call the annual general meeting even
within three months after the expiry of the time-limit referred to in Subsection(1), the office may give direction to call the annual general meeting of
such company.
(3) If the company fails to ca;; the annual general meeting even within
three months after the receipt of the direction as referred to on Sub-section(2),
any shareholder may make a petition, setting out the matter, to the court. Where
such petition is made, the Court may either cause to hold the annual general
meeting or issue any other appropriate order.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (1) and (2) of

section 73, the shareholders present in the general meeting called pursuant to
the order of the court under Sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a quorum.
Matters to be presented and decided in annual general meeting: (1) The
directors shall present the annual financial statements as audited, auditor’s
report and director’s report at the annual general meeting of a public company.
(2) If the shareholder or shareholders representing at least five per cent
of the total number of votes shall so desire, he/they may, by submitting an
application to the directors prior the issue of a notice under Sub-section (2) of

Section 67, cause any matter to be presented at the annual general meeting for
discussion and decision.
(3) At least twenty one days prior to the holding of the annual general
meeting, every public company shall make arrangement so that the
shareholders can inspect and obtain copies of the annual financial statement,
directors’ report and auditors’ report as referred to in Section 84 and publish a
notice in a national daily newspapers for information thereof.
(4) Information of the statements and reports as referred to in Subsection (3) may also be disseminated through electronic communication media,
as per necessity.
(5) If any shareholder makes a request for a copy of the annual financial
statement, directors’ report and auditor’s report as referred to in Sub-section (3),
the company shall provide a copy of such reports or statements to such
shareholder.
(6) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, matters of distribution of
dividends to shareholders, appointment pf directors and their remuneration,
appointment of auditor and his/her remuneration of such other items as
required by this Act or the articles of association to be decided by the annual
general meeting of the company can be presented at the decided by the annual
general meeting of the company can be presented at and decided by that
meeting.
Provided, however, that on the rate of dividends to be distributed to the
shareholders shall be made in a manner to exceed the rate of such dividends
fixed by the board of directors.
Report to be submitted to Office: Every public company shall prepare a
report indicating the following matters and submit the same to the Office in
advance of at least twenty one days before the holding of the annual general
meeting. Such report has to be approved by the board of directors and certified
by the auditor of the company.
The total number of the shares allotted,
Number of fully paid up and unpaid shared out of the
allotted shares out of the allotted shares,
Particulars of director, managing director, auditor,
executive chief and manager of the company, and amount
of remuneration, allowance and facility paid to them,
The names of individuals or corporate bodies subscribing
five percent of more of the paid up capital of the
company, and details of shares or debentures held in their
names,
The total proceeds of the sale of shares, and particulars of
the new shares and debentures issued and raised by the
company in the financial year concerned,
The amount due and payable by the director or substantial
shareholder to his/her close relative to the company,
The details of payment made or to be made against the
sale of shares or for any other matters,
The amount of loans borrowed from banks and financial
institutions and of principal and interest due and payable,
The amount claimed to be receivable by the company or
payable by the company to any other person to details of,
lawsuits, if any , ongoing in this respect,
The number of expatriate employees engaged in the
management of the company and at other levels, and
remuneration, allowances and facilities paid to them,
The number of expatriate employees engaged in the
management of the company and at other levels, and
remuneration, allowances and facilities paid to them,
Where any agreement has been entered into between the
company and any foreign body or person on investment,
management or technical services or other matter for a
period of more than one year, particulars thereof and the
particulars of the dividend, commission, fee, charge and
royalty, as well paid under such agreement in the financial
year concerned,
A statement of the management expenditures of the
company in a financial year,
The amount of dividends yet to be claimed buy the
shareholders,
A declaration that the company has fully observed this Act
and the prevailing law,
Other necessary matters.
Preparation of documents for annual general meeting: At least twenty one
days prior to the holding of the annual general meeting, every public company
shall prepare the annual financial statements, directors report, auditor’s report
to be discussed in the meeting, the report prepared under Section 78 and the
resolutions to be presented in the meeting and arrange to so keep the same at its
registered office that the shareholders can inspect them; and if any shareholder
makes and application for a copy thereof, a copy thereof shall be provided to
him/her.
Provided, however, that the resolutions to be presented in the meeting as
special resolution shall be sent, along with a notice of the meeting, at the
address of the shareholder.
Return of annual general meeting to be forwarded to Office: (1) Every
public company shall, within thirty days of the holding of the annual general
meeting, forward to the Office a return indicating the number of shareholders
present in the meeting, a copy of the annual financial statement, director’s
report and auditor’s report and resolution adopted by the meeting.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, every private company
shall submit a copy of the annual financial statement certified by the auditor to
the Office within six months of the completion of its financial year.
Fine to be imposed in case of failure to submit returns: (1) Any return,
notice or information required to be provided by the company to this Office or
information required to be provided by the officer or shareholder to the
company pursuant to this Act shall be provided by the director of the company
or the officer or shareholder who has the duty to provide such return, notice or
information to the Officer or the company, as the case may be, within the time
limit, if any, prescribed by this Act for the provision of such return, notice or
information.
(2) The following director of a company or its officer who is in default
in providing the return, notice, information or reply as referred to in Section
♣51, 78, 80, 120, 131 or 156 within the time limit as referred to in Sub-section
(1) shall be punished by the Registrar with fine, as follows:
A fine of one thousand rupees if the paid up capital of the
company is up to two million five hundred thousand
rupees, a fine of two thousand rupees if the paid up capital
of the capital is up to often million rupees, and a fine of
five thousand rupees if the paid up capital of the company
is more than ten million rupees, for a period not exceeding
three months after the expiry of the time limit;
A fine of one thousand five hundred rupees if the paid up
capital of the company is up to two million five hundred
rupees, a fine of three thousand rupees if the paid up
capital of the capital is up to ten million rupees, and a fine
of seen thousand rupees if the paid up capital of the
company is more than ten million rupees, for and
♣ Amended by the Some Nepal Act (Amendment) Act, 2064
additional period not exceeding three months after the
expiry of the time limit as referred to in Clause (a);
A fine of two thousand five hundred rupees if the paid up
capital of the company is up to two million five hundred
thousand rupees, a fine of five thousand rupees if the paid
up capital of the capital is up to ten million rupees, and a
fine of ten thousand rupees if the paid up capital of the
company is more than ten million rupees, for an additional
period not exceeding six months after the expiry of the
time limit as referred to in Clause(b);
A fine of five thousand rupees, for each year, if the paid
up capital of the company is up to two million five
hundred thousand rupees, a fine of ten thousand rupees ,
for each year, if the paid up capital of the capital is up to
ten million rupees, and a fine of twenty thousand rupees,
for each year, if the paid up capital of the company is more
than ten million rupees, in cases where even the time limit
as referred to in Clause (c) has also expired.
(3) In the case of a company not distributing profits which is in default
in providing such statement, in formation or notice within the time limit as
referred to in Sub-section (1), the director or officer of such company shall be
liable to the same fine as is imposable on a company of which paid up capital is
up to ten million rupees.
(4)Any director, office or shareholder who is liable to pay the fine as
referred to in Sub-section (2) shall pay it too the Office and submit to the
Office or the concerned company such returns as required to be forwarded.
(5) In calculating the period of expiration of the time limit pursuant to
Sub-section (2), it shall be calculated from the date of commencement of this
(6) Any director, officer or shareholder of a company who is in default
in providing such other statement, notice or information as is required to be
forwarded to the Office pursuant to this Act shall be punished with a fine of
two hundred rupees for every month, after the expiration of one month of the
date of expiry of the time limit within which such statement, notice or
information is required to be provided.
Extra-ordinary general meeting: (1) The board of directors of a company
may convene an extra-ordinary general meeting if it deems necessary.
(2) If, in the course of examining the account of a company, it is deemed
necessary to call an extra ordinary general meeting for any reason, the auditor
may request the board of directors to call such meeting; and if the board of
directors fails to call the meeting accordingly, the auditor may make an
application, setting out the matter, too the Office; and if an application is so
made, the Office may call the extra-ordinary general meting of the company.
(3) If the shareholders holding at least ten percent shares of the paid–up
capital of a company or at least twenty five per cent shareholders of the total
number of shareholders make an application, setting out the reasons therefore,
to the registered office of the company for calling an extra-ordinary general
meeting of the company.
(4) If the board of directors does not call the extra-ordinary general
meeting within thirty days from the date on which an application is made
pursuant to Sub-section (3), the concerned shareholders may make a petition to
the Office setting out the matter; and if such petition is made, the Office may
cause to call such meeting.
(5) If the Office deems necessary to call an extra-ordinary general
meeting in view of the findings of any inspection or investigation or for any
others reason, it any itself call or cause there board of directors to call such
meeting.
Special resolutions to be presented: Special resolutions shall be presented in
the general meeting of a company for decision on the following matters:
Increasing the authorized capital of the company,
Decreasing or altering the share capital of the company,
Altering the name or main objectives of the company,
Amalgamating one company into another company,
Issuing bonus share,
Buying back of own shares by the company,
Selling shares at a discount,
Converting a private company into a public company or vice versa,
Such other matter in respect of which the company is required by this
Act or the articles of association to adopt a special resolution.
Provisions on sending abstract of financial statement to shareholders: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, a company listed in
the stock exchange shall not be required to send the annual financial statement
and director’s report to its shareholders or debenture-holders
Provided, however, that an abstract of financial statement prepared pursuant to
Sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be sent to every shareholder along with the notice
of annual general meeting.
(2) The abstract of financial statement required to be sent pursuant to the
proviso to Sub-section (10) shall be prepared on the basis of the annual
financial statement of the company and the director’s report. The format of
such statement shall be as specified by the Office based on the suggestions of
the body specified to set accounting standards under the prevailing law.
(3) The abstract of financial statement shall contain, inter alia, the
flowing matters:
Matter indicating that the abstract of annual financial
statement is only an abstract of the annual financial
statement of the company and their director’s report,
An opinion of the company’s auditor as to whether or not
the abstract of annual financial statement is in consonance
with the annual financial statement of the company and the
director’s report and whether or not the abstract is
consistent with the format specified pursuant to this
Section,
Matter as to whether or not the auditor has made any
remarks about the annual financial statement of the
company and, if such remarks have been made, full details
of such remarks and such materials as required to
understand such remarks,
In cases where the auditor has mentioned in his/her report
anything about the inadequacy of the accounts and
accounting returns or about the company’s accounts not
being verifiable with the records and returns maintained
by the company or about the non-receipt of any such
information and explanation as sought, full details thereof.
(4) Instead of sending the abstract of annual financial statement to the
shareholders at their personal addresses pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
company many publish it at least twice in a national daily newspaper at the
time of publishing the notice of meeting.
(5) In the event of publication of the abstract of annual financial
statement pursuant to Sub-section (4), there shall not be required to send the
abstract at the personal addresses of shareholders.
Registration number to be mentioned: A company shall mention its
registration number in all such reports, statements, records or other documents
as required to be submitted by it to the Office for the purposes of this Act.

Chapter 6
Board of Directors
86. Board of directors and number of directors: (1) The appointment and number
of directors of a private company shall be as provided in its articles of
association.
(2) Every public company shall have a board of directors consisting of a
minimum of three and a maximum of eleven directors.
(3) In forming the board of directors pursuant to Sub-section (2), at least
one independent director, in the case of the number of directors not exceeding
seven, and at least two independent directors, in the case of the number of
directors exceeding seven, shall be appointed from amongst the persons who
have the knowledge as prescribed in the articles of association of the company
and gained knowledge and experience in the subject related with the business
of the company concerned.
(4) Any one director selected by the directors from amongst themselves
shall be the Chairperson of the board of directors.
Appointment of directors: (1) The directors of a company shall be appointed
by the general meeting of the company, subject to the provisions contained in

Section 89 and the articles of association.
Provided however, that:
(1) The directors shall be appointed by the promoters pending
the holding of the first annual general meeting of the
company.
(2) If the office of any director appointed by the annual general
meeting is vacated for any reason, the board of directors
shall appoint another director in that vacancy.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), in the case
of a company any shares in which a corporate body has subscribed, the
corporate body may appoint a director in proportion of the total number of
directors of the company and the number of shares subscribed by such body
and also an alternate director to attend and vote in a meeting of the board of
instead of every such director in cases where such director will not be in a
position to attend the meeting of the board for any reason.
(3) Where any director appointed pursuant to Sub-section (2) is not able
to attend a meeting of the board of directors, such director shall give
information thereof to his/her alternate director and the board of directors. In
such case, the alternate director shall be entitled to attend, and vote in, the
meeting of the board of directors.
(4) Except in the case referred to in Sub-section (1), any alternate
director appointed pursuant to Sub-section (2) shall not be entitled to attend,
and vote in , a meeting of the board of directors.
Shares qualification of director: If the articles of association of a company
specify any number of shares required to be held by a person for his/her
appointment as director of the company, the person who becomes director shall
hold such number of shares. Failing any provision specifying such number of
shares, any such person shall hold at least one hundred shares.
Provided, however, that any director who is appointed pursuant to Subsection (3) of Section 86 and Sub-section (2) of Section 87 shall not be
required to hold such shares.
Circumstances where one is disqualified to be appointed to, or continue to
hold, office of director: (1) Any of the following persons shall not be eligible
to be appointed to the office of director:
Who is below Twenty one years of age, in the case of a
public company;
Who is of unsound mind or is insane;
Who is a declared insolvent and a period of five years has
not lapsed;
Who is convicted of an offense of corruption or of an
offense involving moral turpitude.
Provided, that in the case of a private company, a period of
three years has not lapsed from the date of such sentence,
who is convicted of an offense of theft, fraud, forgery or
embezzlement or misuse of goods or funds entrust to
him/her, in an authorized manner, and sentenced in respect
thereof, a period of three year has not elapsed from the
expiry of the sentence;
who has personal interest of any kind in the business or
any contract or transaction of the concerned company;
who is already a director, substantial shareholder,
employee, auditor or adviser of another company having
similar objectives or has personal interest of any kind in
such company;
Provided, however, that such person of a private
company may become a director of another private
company having similar objectives.
Who is a shareholder that is held to have failed to pay any
amount due and payable by him/her to the concerned;
In the case of a person who has been sentenced to
punishment pursuant to Section 160, a period of one year
is not lapsed from the date of sentence, or in the case of a
person who has been sentenced to punishment pursuant to

Section 161, a period of six months has not lapsed after
the date of sentence;
In the event that the prevailing laws prescribed any
qualification or disqualification in the case of a company
carrying on any specific business, who does not possess
such qualification or suffers from such disqualification;
Who is already a director of any company which has not
submitted such reruns and reports as required to be
submitted to the Office under this Act, for any continuous
three financial years;
Who is holding the office of director receiving from
another listed company any remuneration or facility, other
than a meeting allowance and actual expenses to be in
curried in coming to, going from, and staying in, the place
of meeting.
(2) Any of the following persons shall not be eligible to be appointed to
the office of in independent director:
Who is a person as referred to in Sub-section(1);
Who is a shareholder of the concerned company;
Who has not obtained at least bachelor degree in a subject
that is related to the business to be carried on by the
concerned company and gained at least ten years of
experience in the related field or in the company
management affairs or who has not obtained at least
bachelor degree in finance, economics, management,
accounts, statistics, commerce, trade or law and gained at
least ten years of experience in the related field;
Who is an officer, auditor or employee of the concerned
company or a period of three years has not lapsed after
his/her retirement from any such office;
Who is the close relative of the office of the concerned
company;
Who is an auditor of the concerned company or his/her
partner.
(3) No person shall continue to hold the office of a director in any of the
following circumstances;
If one suffers from any disqualification for appointment to
the post of director as mentioned in Sub-section (1) or (2);
If the general meeting passes a resolution to remove
him/her from the office of director,
If the resignation tendered by the director is accepted by
the board of directors;
If one is held by a court to have done any act involving
dishonesty or ulterior motive in the activities of the
company;
If one is held by a court to have done any act prohibited by
this Act from being done by a director or to have failed to
do any act required to be done under this Act;
If one is blacklisted by a competent body pursuant to the
prevailing law for his/her default in repaying a loan of any
bank or financial institution, and the period of such black
listing has not expired.
(4) Prior to holding any person to be disqualified for being appointed to
the office of a director or holding such office, the company shall give
information thereof to him/her and provide him/her with a reasonable
opportunity to defend him/herself.
Term of of ice of directors: (1) The tenure of office of a director of a private
company shall be as provided in its articles of association
(2) The tenure of office of a director of a public company shall be as
specified in its articles of association, which shall not exceed four years.
Provided that:
A director appointed by the Government of Nepal or a
corporate body shall hold office so long as the Government of
Nepal or the appointing body desires.
A director appointed pursuant to Clauses (1) and (2) of the
proviso to Section 87 shall hold office only until the holding
of the annual general meeting.
The term of office of a director appointed to the office of any
director which has fallen vacant before the expiry of his/her
term of office shall be only the remainder of the tenure of
office of that director whose office has so fallen vacant and
in whose place one is appointed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law or articles
of association , a person retired from the office of director on expiry of his/her
tenure of office shall be eligible for reappointment to the office of director.
Remuneration, allowance, reward etc. of directors: (1) The meeting
allowance to be receivable by the directors for attending a meeting, their
monthly remuneration, daily allowance and traveling allowance or other
facility shall be as determined by the general meeting.
(2) The general meeting of any company may, by adopting a special
resolution, grant a reward in a sum not exceeding three per cent of the net
profits after payment of income tax to the directors who work full time for the
company so as to encourage them.
Provided, however, that where, on final assessment of tax under the
prevailing law, the company has to pay additional income tax, the company
shall recover the amount of such additional tax from the directors, who have
received such reward, on a proportional basis up to the extent of the amount of
reward received by them.
(3) Pending the holding of the first annual general meeting, the board of
directors may determine the remuneration and facilities of the managing
director or other directors who work full time for the company.
(4) Except where the general meeting of a listed company so permits, in
the event that any director of a listed company is retired from or relieves of
his/her office, the company shall not make any kind of payment as
compensation for such relief or retirement.
Disclosure by directors: (1) A director shall, no later than seven days after
assuming the office of director, disclose in writing to the company the
following matters:
If he/she or his/her close relative has direct involvement or
any kind of personal interest in any kind of sale and
purchase or other kind of contract related with the
transactions of the company;
Explanation: For the purposes of this Clause, “direct
involvement” means and includes a situation where the
director or his/her close relative is a promoter of or holds
more that ten per cent shares of a company or private firm
or partnership firm or a director of a company involved in
such transaction.
If he/she has any kind of interest in the appointment of the
managing director, company secretary, officer of the
company;
If he/she is a director of any other company;
If he/she has made any dealing in the shares or debentures
of the company or of its holding or subsidiary company,
about matters of such dealing.
(2) In making disclosure pursuant to Sub-section(1) , a copy of the
written agreement, if any, concluded between the company and the director or
his/she close relative shall be submitted, and failing such agreement, substantial
and necessary matters concerning the transaction or interest or involvement
shall be set out.
(3) The company shall submit to the Office the information as referred
to in Sub-section (1) within seven days of the receipt of such information; and
upon receipt of such information, the Office shall record the same in a separate
register maintained for this purpose.
(4) If any director has an interest directly or indirectly linked to any kind
of contract, lease, transaction or agreement entered or to be entered with the
concerned company or its subsidiary company or comes to his/her knowledge
that such interest will be so linked, that director shall disclose that matter to the
company promptly, setting out the extent and kind of such interest.
(5) If any director gives written in formation to the company that he be
considered to have his/her personal interest in a transaction with any certain
person, that director shall be deemed to have disclosed his/her personal interest
in any transaction or contract to be done or made with such person.
Transaction with company in which director is involved: (1) Except as
otherwise provided this Section, no public company shall, without approval of
the general meeting, do any significant transaction with its director or his/her
close relative or substantial shareholder or no subsidiary company shall,
without approval of the general meeting of its holding company, do any
significant transaction with any director or his/her close relative or substantial
shareholder of the holding company.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, “significant transaction” means
a transaction of sale, purchase, exchange and contract the value of which, at the
time of doing the transaction, exceeds one hundred thousand rupees or five
percent of the total assets of the company, whichever is the lesser, and this term
also includes a rental transaction amounting to one hundred twenty thousand
rupees or more annually.
(2) If any transaction is done in contravention of Sub-section (1), any
amount or benefit derived from that transaction directly or indirectly shall be
returned to the company; and if any loss or damage is caused from such
transaction to the company, the person deriving benefit from such transaction
shall also pay compensation for such loss or damage.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
provision of Sub-section (1) shall not apply to the in-kind property acquired as
follows:
While acquiring such property by a holding company from
its wholly owned subsidiary company;
While acquiring such property by a subsidiary company
wholly owned by a holding company from another
subsidiary company wholly owned by the same holding
company;
While doing transaction at the prevailing market price in
the ordinary course of business transaction of the company.
Directors to make disclosure in shares: (1) If a person, while holding the
office of director, acquires title to any shares or debentures of the company or
of a company which is a subsidiary or holding company of that company or of
another subsidiary company of the holding company, in any manner, that
person shall give information as follows on that matter to the company:
Details of his/her title;
Number of shares of each class in the concerned company
or another company to or in which he/she has title or
interest while holding the office of director and details of
amount of debentures of each class.
(2) If the following situation occurs, any director of a company shall
give written information thereof to the company in which he/she is a director
no later than fifteen days after such situation comes to his/her knowledge:
If, for any reason, he/she is going to acquire title to any
shares or debentures of the company in which he/she is a
director or of a company which is a subsidiary or holding
company of that company or of another subsidiary
company of the holding company, in any manner , or
he/she is going to lose his/her title;
If he enters into an agreement to sell the shares or
debentures, as referred to in Clause (a), held in his/her
name;
If he/she assigns to any other person the authority granted
by the company in which he is a director to him/her to
subscribe the shares or debentures of such company;
If a company which is a subsidiary or holding company of
the company in which he/she is a director or another
company which is a subsidiary of such company or other
subsidiary of the holding company grants authority to
him/her to subscribe the shareholders or debentures of
such company;
If he assigns to any other person the authority to subscribe
the shares or debentures or the company as referred to in
Clause (d).
(3) While forwarding information to the company pursuant to Subsection (2), such information shall also clearly setout the number of shares or
debentures, amount and class thereof.
(4) The company shall maintain a separate register to record the
information receive pursuant to Sub-section (2) and (3).
(5) The provisions contained in this Section shall also apply to the close
relative of a director as if such relative were a director.
Powers and duties of board of directors: (1) Subject to the provisions
contained in this Act and the articles of association and the decisions of the
general meeting, the directors shall manage all transaction, exercise of powers
and perform duties of the company through the board of directors collectively.
(2) Except in accordance with a decision of the general meeting no
director of a public company shall do anything yielding personal benefit to
him/her through the company.
Provided, however, that a private company may make a reasonable provision
on the benefit which the director may derive thought the company, as
mentioned in the memorandum of association and articles of association or
consensus agreement.
(3) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the memorandum of
association and articles of association or the consensus agreements, the case of
a private company, the board of directors may appoint any director from
amongst themselves or any employee of the company as its representative and
so delegate to him/her any or all of its powers, inter alia, to do any act or thing,
make correspondences or sign bills of exchange or cheques etc. On behalf of
the company that such powers are to be exercised individually or jointly. In so
delegating the powers, at least one director and their company secretary, if any,
shall certify such delegation, pursuant to a decision of the board of directors.
(4) A company may recover damages from a person acting in the
capacity of director or representative of the company for any loss or damage
caused to the company from any act or action done by such person beyond
his/her jurisdiction.
(5) If any person enters into any transaction with the director or with a
representative as referred to in Sub-section (3) despite the knowledge or having
reason to believe that such director or representative is dealing with any
transaction for his/her personal interest or for causing loss or damage to the
company, such person shall not be entitled to make any claim against the
company in respect of such transaction.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (3), the board of
directors shall not delegate the following powers conferred to the company and
shall exercise such powers only by means of resolutions passed at meetings of
the board of directors :
The power to make calls on shareholders in respect of
amount unpaid on their shares;
The power to issue debentures;
The power to borrow loans or amount otherwise than on
debentures;
The power to invest the funds of the company;
The power to make loans.
(7) The provision of Clause(e) of Sub-section(6) shall not apply to loans
to be let and deposits to be received in the ordinary course of business
transaction by the companies carrying on banking and financial business.
(8) If the board of directors considers necessary to form a subcommittee for the discharge of any specific business, it may form one or more
than one sub-committee as required and get such business discharged.
Appointment of managing directors, and management of company: (1) The
directors may, subject to the articles of association, appoint one managing
director from amongst themselves.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the managing director shall be
as mentioned in the articles of association or as prescribed by the board of
directors.
(3) While appoint a managing director and other director talking
responsibility of the management of the company pursuant to Sub-section (1),
there shall be entered into an agreement in writing stipulating the terms of
appointment, remuneration and facilities; and no facilities or payment other
than the remuneration and facilities specified in such agreement and any other
facilities receivable as specified by the general meeting shall be provided or
made.
(4) The term of agreement as referred to in Sub–section (3) shall not
exceed four years at a time.
(5) There shall be made such arrangement that the shareholders can
inspect, free of charge, the agreement entered into with the directors pursuant
to Sub-section (3).
(6) A director who is receiving regular remuneration or facilities, other
than meeting allowances, from any one listed company shall not be appointed
to the post of managing director in another listed company, with entitlement to
regular remuneration or facilities.
Meetings of board of directors: (1) Meetings of the board of directors of a
private company shall be held as mentioned in the articles of association.
(2) Meetings of the board of directors of a public company shall be held
at least six times in a year.
Provided, however, that the interval between any two meetings shall not
exceed three months.
(3) The directors shall be present in personal meetings of the board of
directors of a company. The presence of the proxy of a director in his/her stead
shall not be held valid.
(4) No meeting of the board of directors shall be held unless it is
attended by at least fifty one per cent of the total number of directors of the
company.
Provided, however, that any director who is not entitled to take parting any
matter to be discussed in a meeting of the board of directors under this Act
shall not be counted for the purposes of this subsection.
(5) If a meeting of the board of directors cannot be held because of the
lack of presence of directors in the number mentioned in Sub-section (4),
another meeting may be called by giving a notice of at least three days. Even if
such meting is not attended by the directors in the number mentioned in Subsection (4), the proceedings and decisions conducted and made by the attending
directors shall be valid.
(6) The decision of a majority in a meeting of the board of directors
shall be binding, and in the event of a tie, the Chairperson may exercise the
casting vote, in addition to a vote cast by him/her as a director.
Provided, however, that any director who has any personal concern or interest
in any matter to be discussed in a meeting of the board of directors shall not be
entitled to take part in such discussion and vote on the matter.
(7) Minutes regarding the names of directors present in the meeting of
board of directors, the subjects discussed and the decisions taken thereon shall
be recorded in a separate book, and such minute book shall be signed by at
least fifty one per cent of the total directors present in the meeting.
Provided, however, that, if any director puts forward any opinion
opposed too or differing from the decision in the course of discussions on any
subject in a meeting, he/she may mention the same in the minute book .
(8) Any decision shall not be deemed invalid merely for the reason that
there is no signature of any member.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (3), (4), (5) and
(6),except in the cases that are so expressly prohibited by them memorandum
of association or articles of association, if all the members of the board of
directors or a sub-committee of directors so consent in writing in regard to any
act or resolution permitted to be done or adopted by the board of directors or
such sub-committee, such act may be done even without holding a meeting by
recording such consent in the minute book.
(10) The consent referred to in Sub-section (9) shall be deemed to be a
decision of a meeting of board of directors.
Notice of meeting of board of directors: (1) Except as otherwise provided in
the articles of association of a company, the company secretary or Chairperson
of the board or chief executive of the company shall call a meeting of the board
of directors of the company.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) if at least
twenty five per cent directors of the total number of directors make written
requisition, setting out the subject to be discussed in the meeting, for calling the
meeting of the board of directors, the Chairperson shall call the meeting of the
board no later than seven days of the receipt of such requisition. If the meeting
of the board of directors is not called within that period, such requisition
making directors themselves may call the meting of the board of directors.
(3) The matters about the notice of a meeting of the board of directors
shall be as provided in the articles of association of the company. Failing such
provision, a written notice of the meeting of board of directors and agenda
thereof shall be sent to every directors at the address supplied by him/her to the
company; and such notice may also be given through any electronic means of
communication.
Responsibilities and duties of directors: (1) No director or of a company shall
do any thing to derive personal benefit through the company or in the course of
conducting business of the company.
(2) If any person has derived personal benefit in the course of business
of the company in contravention of Sub-section (1), the company shall recover
the amount involved in the matter from such director as if such amount were a
loan.
(3) Any person appointed as a director of a public company shall, prior
to assuming the duties of his/her office, take an oath of secrecy and honesty in
a format as prescribed.
(4) Every director and officer of a company shall, in discharging their
duties, act honestly and in good faith, having regard to the interest and benefit
of the company, and exercise such care, caution, wisdom, diligence and
efficiency as a reasonable and prudent person exercises.
(5) The company may recover damages for any loss or damage caused
too the company from a director who does any act with ulterior motive, causing
such loss or damage to the company, in contravention of Sub-section (4).
(6) It shall be the duty of every director to comply with this Act,
memorandum of association, articles of association of the company and the
consensus agreement.
100. Disclosure about securities: (1) In the event that the shares or debentures of a
company are listed in a body operating the stock exchange, after the director
has made disclosure to the company about the shares or debentures of such
company pursuant to Section 94, the company shall promptly give information
thereof to such body.
(2) Such body shall publish the information received pursuant to Subsection (10) in such manner as it thinks fit.
101. Prohibition on loans to officers or shareholders: (1) No company shall make
any loan or provide any financial assistance to its officer, substantial
shareholders or officer, shareholder of a holding company or a close relative of
such person nor shall it give any guarantee or provide security in respect of any
loan borrowed by such officer or shareholder or close relative from any other
person.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any loan or
facility to be made or provided to any employee of a company in accordance
with the rules of the company or to any loan made or guarantee given by any
bank or financial institution in the ordinary course of business transaction,
except as prohibited by the prevailing law.
(2) Any person mentioned in Sub-section (1) shall repay any loan, which
was borrowed by him/her prior to the commencement of this Act, no later than
22 Ashwin 2065 (8 December 2008).
102. Prohibition on giving false statements by officers: If any officer, knowingly
giving false statements in a general meeting of a company, about the actual
financial situation of the company, encourage to distribute higher dividend to
the shareholders of the company than that can be distributed from the profits,
thereby affecting the capital of the company, the officer giving such false
statements shall be personally liable for such act.
103. Transaction with other person and jurisdiction of company: (1) No
transaction done by a company with another person shall be void or invalid
merely on the ground that such transaction is beyond jurisdiction based on any
matter contained in the memorandum of association of the company.
(2) It shall be the duty of every director and officer to do such
transaction within the ambit of jurisdiction specified in the memorandum of
association of the company
(3) Except in the case mentioned in Sub-section (1), any act or
transaction done by a director beyond the authority conferred to him/her may
be rectified by the company by adopting a special resolution in its general
meeting.
(4) No director, officer or other person of the company shall be deemed
to have been released from any liability under this Act for any act done or
action taken by him/her beyond jurisdiction merely on the ground that any act
or transaction has been ratified by a special resolution pursuant to Subsection(3).
104. Company to be bound: (1) Any act done or action taken by or document
signed by at least one director authorized by a company or any person
authorized to act for the company shall be valid and binding for the company.
(2) where any person does any transaction with a company in good faith,
such transaction shall be binding for the company; and nothing contained in
memorandum of association, articles of association of the company or in any
resolution adopted by the general meeting or in any agreement concluded
between the company and its shareholder shall be deemed to have made any
limitation in or restriction on the authority of the director or the authorized
person to do such transaction.
Provided, however, that if any officer does any act or transaction mentioned in
Sub-section (1) or (2) in excess of his/her authority, such officer shall be
personally liable for such act or transaction unless such authority is ratified by
the general meeting pursuant to this Act; and the company may also recover
from him/her the loss or damage, if any caused to the company from such act
or transaction.
105. Restrictions on authority of directors: (1) The board of directors of a public
company, or of a private company receiving loans from any bank or financial
institution, shall not, except with a special resolution being adopted by the
general meeting of shareholders, do or cause to be done the following act:
selling, donating, gifting, leasing or otherwise disposing of
more than seventy per cent of one or more undertakings
being operated by it;
borrowing moneys, where the moneys to be borrowed will
exceed the aggregate of the paid up capital of the company
and its free reserves, apart from any loans and faculties
with a term of less than six months obtained by it from a
bank or financial institution in the ordinary course of
business transaction;
making a contribution, donation or gift in a sum exceeding
fifty thousand rupees in one financial year or a sum
exceeding one per cent of the average net profits of the
company during the last three financial years, whichever is
the lesser, except the contribution, donation, gift etc. made
for the welfare of its employees or for the promotion of its
business.
Provided, however, that:
Nothing contained in Clause (a) shall affect the title
of a buyer who buys any property or undertaking of a
company on payment of the prevailing market price
from a company which is solely engaged in the
business of buying and selling of movable and
immovable properties.
The provision of Clause (b) shall not be applicable to
the acceptance by a company carrying on banking or
financial transaction or insurance business of deposits
or insurance premium from the general public in the
ordinary course of its business transaction.
(2) The general meeting may specify appropriate terms and conditions
while giving approval for the purposes of Sub-section (1).
106. Validity of acts already done: If it is afterwards discovered that any provision
under this Act has not been complied with in respect of the appointment of any
director, acts already done by such director him/her before the discovery of
such fact shall not be rendered invalid by that fact.
107. Registers of director and company secretary: (1) Every company shall
maintain a separate register of director and of company secretary, if any.
(2) Every company shall record the name, surname, address, citizenship,
profession, occupation of its director or secretary, and the date of appointment
as director or secretary as well as the date of removal, if applicable, in the
register maintained pursuant to Sub-section, (1), and shall send a notice of the
alteration, if any, made in such detail within fifteen days.

Chapter 7
Accounts and Records of company
108. Accounts of company: (1) Every company shall duly maintain its accounts in
the Nepali or the English language.
(2) The accounts to be maintained under Sub-section (1) shall be
maintained according to the double entry system of accounting and in
consonance with the accounting standards enforced by the competent body
under the prevailing law and with such other terms and provisions required to
be observed pursuant to this Act, in such a manner as to clearly reflect the
actual affairs of the Company.
(3) The books of account of a company shall not be kept at any place
other than its registered office, except with the approval of the Office.
(4) The cash balance of a company, other than the amount specified by
the board of directors, shall be deposited in a bank and transaction shall be
done through the bank.
(5) Subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter, the directors or
other officers shall have the final responsibility to maintain books of account
and records of the company.
(6) Where there is a default in complying with the provisions made in
this Act in respect of the preparation of books of account and annual financial
statements of a company, the director or officer him/herself, during whose
tenure the annual financial statements and other reports have been prepared,
shall be responsible under this Act.
109. Annual financial statement and report of board of directors: (1) The
following annual financial statements shall be prepared by the board of
directors of a public company every year at least thirty days prior to the holding
of its annual general meeting, and in the case of a private company, within six
months of the expiry of its financial year:
Balance sheet as at the last date of the financial year.
Profit and loss account of the financial year.
Description of cash flow of the financial year.
(2) This annual financial statement to be prepared pursuant to Subsection(1) shall give true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company as
at the last day of the financial year concerned and also state the account of
profit and loss and description of cash flow made in that financial year. Such
financial statements shall be prepared in the format prescribed by the prevailing
(3) The annual financial statements as referred to in Sub-section (1)shall
have to be approved by the board of directors and audited.
(4) The board of directors of every public company or every private
company with the paid –up capital of ten million rupees or more or with an
annual turnover of ten million rupees or more shall also prepare a separate
report of board of directors during that period stating the following matters, in
addition to the annual financial statements required to be prepared pursuant to
Sub-section (1):
Review of the transactions of the previous year;
Impacts, if any, caused on the transactions of the company
from national and international situation;
Achievements in the current year as at the date of report
and opinions of the board of directors on matters to be
done in the future;
Industrial or professional relations of the company;
Alterations in the board of directors and the reasons
therefore;
Major things affecting the transactions;
If there are any remarks in the audit report, the comments
of the board of directors on such remarks;
Amount recommended for payment by way of dividend;
In the event of forfeiture of shares, details regarding the
number of forfeited shares, face value of such shares, total
amount received by the company for such shares prior to
the forfeiture thereof, proceeds of sale of such shares after
the forfeiture thereof, and refund of amount ,if any, made
for such forfeited shares;
Progress of transactions of the company and of its
subsidiary company in the previous financial year and
review of the situation existing at the end of that financial
year;
Major transactions completed by the company and its
subsidiary company in the financial year and any material
changes taken place in the transactions of the company
during that period;
Disclosures made by the substantial shareholders of the
company to the company in the previous financial year;
Details of shareholding taken by the directors and officers
of the company in the previous financial year and , in the
event of their involvement in share transaction of the
company, details of information received by the company
from them in that respect;
Details of disclosures made about the personal interest of
any director and his/her close relative in any agreements
related with the company during the previous financial
year;
In the event that the company has bought its own shares
(buy-back), the reasons for such buy-back ,number and
face value of such shares, and amount paid by the
company for such buy-back;
Whether there is an internal control system in place or not;
and details of such system, if it is in place;
Details of total management expenses during the previous
financial year;
Name-list
members
audit
committee,
remuneration, allowances and facilities received by them,
details of the functions performed by that committee, and
details of suggestions, if any, made by that committee;
Amount, if any, outstanding and payable to the company
by any director, managing director ,chief executive,
substantial shareholder or his/her close relative or by any
firm company, corporate body in which he/she is involved;
Amount of remuneration, allowances and faculties paid to
the director, managing director, chief executive and officer;
Amount of dividends remaining unclaimed by the
shareholders ;
Details of sale and purchase of properties pursuant to

Section 141;
Details of transactions carried on between the associated
companies pursuant to Section 175;
Any other matters required to be set out in the report of
board of directors under this Act and the prevailing law;
Other necessary matters.
(5) While preparing the annual financial statements pursuant to Subsection (1), such statement shall also contain, in the case of the year of
incorporation of the company, the accounts from the date of its incorporation
to the last day of that financial year, and thereafter, the accounts of the previous
financial year.
(6) The annual financial statements prepared pursuant to this Section
shall be kept open for inspection by any shareholder, if he/she so desires.
(7) The annual financial statements and the report of board of directors
prepared pursuant to this Section shall be approved by the board of directors
and signed by the Chairperson of the board of directors and at least one director.
(8) The accounts and annual financial statements prepared by a company
pursuant to this Chapter shall be kept safely for at least five years after the date
of expiry of the financial year concerned.
(9) The officers who prepare any false annual financial statements,
reports of board of directors and other returns and reports required to be
prepared pursuant to this Act and the directors who approve the same shall be
liable to punishment under this Act.

Chapter 8
Audit
110. Company to appoint auditor: (1) Every company shall appoint an auditor
under this Act to have its accounts audited.
(2) In cases where any company has a branch office outside Nepal, the
auditor appointed pursuant to Sub-section (1) may also audit the accounts of
that branch office except as otherwise provide in the prevailing law of the
country where such branch office is situated.
111. Appointment of auditor: (1) The auditor of accompany shall be appointed,
from amongst the auditors licensed to carry out audit under the prevailing law,
by the general meting, subject to Chapter-18 ,in the case of a public company,
and, in accordance with the provision as contained in the memorandum of
association, articles of association or consensus agreement, any failing such
provision, by the general meeting, in the case of a private company; and his/her
name shall be forwarded to the Office within fifteen days from the date of such
appointment.
Provided, however, that the board of directors may appoint the auditor
prior to the holding of the first annual general meeting,
(2) The auditor appointed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall hold office
only until the next annual general meeting.
(3) No auditor or his/her partner or ex-partner or employee or exemployee shall be appointed as auditor for more than three consecutive terms
to perform the audit of a public company.
Provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to any partner
who ended partnership or any employee who left the service of such auditor
three years before.
112. Disqualifications of auditor: (1) None of the following persons or the firms or
companies in which such persons are partners shall be qualified for
appointment as auditor and shall, despite appointment as auditor, continue to
hold office:
A director, advisor appointed with entitlement to regular
remuneration or cash benefit, a person or employee or
worker involved in the management of the company or a
partner of any of them or and employee of any of such
partners or a close relative of a director or partner, out of
them, or and employee of such relative;
A debtor who has borrowed moneys from the company in
any manner, or a person who has failed to pay any dues
payable to the company within the time limit and is in
such arrears or close relative of such person;
A person who has been sentenced to punishment for an
offense pertaining to audit and a period of Three years has
not elapsed thereafter;
A person who has been declared insolvent;
A substantial shareholder of the company or a shareholder
holding one percent or more of the paid up capital of the
company or his/her close relative;
A person who has been sentenced to punishment for an
offense of corruption, fraud or a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude and a period of five years has
not elapsed thereafter;
A person referred to in Sub-section (3) of Section 111;
In the case of a public company , any person who works,
whether full time or part time , for any governmental body
or any body owned fully or partly by the Government of
Nepal or any other company or a partner of such person or
a person who is working as an employee of such partner or
a person who is authorized to sign any documents or
reports to be prepared by the management of the company;
A company or corporate body with limited liability;
A person having interest in any transaction with the
company or his/her close relative or a director, officer or
substantial shareholder of another company having any
interest in any transaction with the company.
(2) The auditor shall, prior to his/her appointment ,give information in
writing to the company that he/she is not disqualified pursuant to Subsection(1).
(3) Where any auditor becomes disqualified to audit the accounts of a
company or there arises a situation where he/she becomes disqualified for
appointment or can no longer continue to act as an auditor of the company,
he/she shall immediately stop performing audit which is required to be
performed or is being performed by him/her and give information thereof to the
company in writing.
(4) The audit performed by an auditor who has been appointed in
contravention of this Section shall be invalid.
113. Power of Office to appoint auditor: Where the annual general meeting of a
company fails to appoint an auditor for any reason or where the annual general
meeting itself cannot be held or where the auditor appointed pursuant to this
Act ceases to continue his/her office for any reason, the Office may, at the
request of the board of directors of the company, appoint another auditor.
114. Accounts and records to be furnished: The books of accounts and records of
a company shall on his/her demand, at any time during office hours be
furnished to the auditor for the purposes of audit; and the concerned director or
employee shall also forthwith give oral explanations on such matter as may be
asked by him/her, within a reasonable period of time.
115. Functions and duties of auditor: (1) The auditor shall, addressing the
shareholders or the appointing authority, submit to the company his/her report,
certifying the balance sheet, profit and loss account and cash flow statement
based on the books of account, records and accounts audited by him/her.
(2) The audit report shall be prepared in accordance with the prevailing
law or in consonance with the audit standards prescribed by the competent
body; and such report shall state the matters to be set out under this Act, as per
necessity.
(3) The audit report as referred to in Sub-section (2) shall also indicate
the following matters, inter alia:
Whether such information and explanations have been
made available as were required for the completion of
audit;
Whether the books of account as required by this Act have
been properly maintained by the company in a manner to
reflect the real affairs of its business;
Whether the balance sheet, profit and loss account and
cash flow statements received have been prepared in
compliance with the accounting standards prescribed
under the prevailing law and whether such statements are
in agreement with the books of account maintained by the
company;
Whether, in the opinion of the auditor based on the
explanations and information made available in the course
of auditing, the present balance sheet properly reflects the
financial situation of the company, and the profit and loss
account and cash flow statement for the year ended on the
same date properly reflect the profit and loss, cash flow of
the company, respectively;
Whether the board of directors or any representative or
employee
acted
contrary
misappropriated any property of the company or caused
any loss or damage to the company or not;
Whether any accounting fraud has been committed in the
company
Suggestion, if any.
116. Audit report to bear auditor’s signature: (1) An audit report prepared by the
auditor appointed by any company this Act shall be signed and dated by the
auditor him/herself.
(2) Whether any company has appointed any accounting institution
licensed under the prevailing law to carry out audit, the member who has been
authorized by a decision of the partners of such institution shall sign and date
the audit report.
117. Information to be provided: The Company shall, subject to the provisions
contained in this Act, send a copy of the report made by the auditor to the
shareholders. Whether there is a provision of formal trade union in such
company, the company shall, at the request in writing of such trade union,
provide one copy of such report to that trade union.
118. Remuneration of auditor: The remuneration of an auditor shall be as
prescribed by the appointing authority; and such remuneration shall be borne
by the company.
119. Provision relating to removal of appointed auditor: (1) No auditor appointed
pursuant to this Chapter shall be removed pending the completion of audit of
accounts of any financial year for which he/she was appointed as the auditor.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) , if any
auditor breaches the code of conduct of auditors or does any act against the
interest of the company which has appointed him/her as the auditor or commits
any act contrary to the prevailing law, such auditor may be removed through
the same process whereby he/she was appointed as auditor, by giving prior
information to the Nepal Chartered Accountants Institute, and with the
approval of the regulatory authority, if any authorized by the prevailing law for
the regulation of business of the company concerned , and failing such
authority, with the approval of the Office.
(3) While removing an auditor pursuant to Sub-section (2), the auditor
shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to defend him/herself.

Chapter 9
Call for Explanation and Investigation
120. Power of Office to call for explanation: (1) Where any matter is unclear in
the documents submitted by a company, and such matter has to be set out or
any explanation is necessary in respect of any matter, the Office may call on
the company to furnish explanation on such matter within such reasonable
period of time as specified by it.
(2) The management of the company shall, within the specified period
of time, send proper replies the specified period of time, sent proper replies to
the matters with respect to which explanation has been called on pursuant to
Sub-section(1).
(3) If, in the course of perusing explanation, the Office notices any
irregularity in the business of a company, it may give necessary directive to the
company to regularize, or cause to be regularized, it, and it shall be the duty of
the company to obey such directive.
121. Power of Office to depute inspector: If the shareholders representing not less
than ten percent of the paid up capital or not less than one –fourth of the total
number of shareholders of the company or the concerning creditors make an
application, accompanied by the supporting evidence and reasonable grounds,
stating that the company has acted in contravention of this Act, the
memorandum of association, articles of association, prospectus, consensus
agreement or prevailing law, the Office may, as per necessity, depute one or
more inspectors. Such inspector shall be an expert in any of the subjects viz.
accounts, law, finance, management, commerce, industry or company
administration or any business which a company carries on the applicant shall
deposit with the Office such amount of estimated cost required for such
investigation as specified by the Office.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), where the
Office is of opinion that the following circumstance does exist, it may, as per
necessity, even if no application is made pursuant to Sub-section (1), appoint
an inspector in possession of the qualification referred to in Sub-section (1), to
investigate the transactions or business of any company:
on the receipt of information that the business or
transaction of the company is being carried on to defraud
the shareholders or creditors of the company or otherwise
for a fraudulent or illegal purpose or it is carrying out acts
against public interest; or
any public company has not furnished such information
about its transactions as is required to be furnished.
122. Functions, duties and powers of inspector: (1) The functions, duties and
powers of the inspector deputed or appointed pursuant to Section 121 shall be
as follows:
in course of investigation, to require those officers or
shareholders or the company, where existing or former,
whom he/she considers appropriate ,or any other persons
who are considered to have information relevant to the
matter into which investigation is to be carried to appear
before him/her and to record their statements; to obtain
necessary information or other reasonable assistance;
to inspect the documents which are relevant for the
purposes of investigation, or to seize or control any other
things, or require any concerned person to produce such
documents or things to him/her, or to take custody of such
documents;
To investigate, or cause to be investigated, into whether
the books of account of the company have been kept
proper.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the periling law, any matter
or deposition expressed or made by any person before the inspector in the
course of investigation pursuant to this Chapter shall be admissible as an
evidence against that person.
123. Assistance to be rendered to inspector: (1) If any person makes a false
deposition, fails to produce such statements or documents or other things as
required to be submitted under Section 122 or fails to answer any question
asked which is put to him/her by the inspector or fails to provide such
information as asked by the inspector for the purposes of investigation, the
inspector may file a compliant report in writing in the Court.
(2) On receipt of a report under Sub-section(1), the Court may, if, on
necessary inquiry made into the matter under the prevailing law, any person is
found guilty, impose such punishment on that person as it considers appropriate
under Section 162.
124. Report to be submitted: (1) The inspector appointed pursuant to this Chapter
shall, on conclusion of the investigation, submit a report, accompanied by
his/her opinions, to the Office. The Office shall give a copy of such report to
the applicant if any shareholder makes an application to get a copy of such
report, the office shall issue a copy thereof to him/her, by collecting the
prescribed fees.
(2) If, from any report made by the inspector under Sub-section (1), It
appears to the Office that any directors, managing directors, managers,
employees or any other officers of the company have knowingly caused any
loss or damage to the company or have defrauded, cheated the shareholders or
creditors or committed any other illegal acts, the Office shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws, order the company to file a lawsuit
on behalf of the company against them.
(3) Where the Office thinks that the company may suffer further loss or
damage if its business is left further in the hand of directors, managing
directors, managers, employees or any other officers who have committed any
act as referred to in Sub-section (2), the Office may give necessary direction to
the company to suspend such directors managing directors, managers,
employees or officers and carry on its business through any other means.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law on
evidence, any matter contained in and any fact expressed in a report submitted
by an inspector pursuant to Sub-section(1) shall be admissible as an evidence.
125. Expenses of investigation: (1) The expenses incurred in an investigation
carried out by the Office pursuant to this Chapter shall be borne by the
concerned company.
Provided, however, that if, in the course of carrying out investigation,
any director, managing director, manager or officer of a company appears to
committed a malice, deception, fraud or cheating, such director, managing
director, manager or officer shall pay the expenses of investigation no later
than seven days of the completion of investigation.
(2) If the concerned director, managing director, manager or officer
does not pay the expenses of investigation pursuant to the expenses of
investigation pursuant to the proviso to Sub-section(1), the expenses shall be
recovered as governmental dues.
(3) An inspector appointed pursuant to this Chapter may give suggestion
in his/her report as to the payment of expenses.

Chapter 10
Voluntary Liquidation of Company
126. Liquidation of company able to pay its debts: (1) Expect in case where a
company has become insolvent in accordance with the prevailing law on
insolvency, the shareholders of the company may liquidate the company either
by adopting a special resolution in the general meeting or memorandum of
association, articles of association or consensus agreement.
(2) A company may be liquidated under this Act in the following
circumstance:
If the company is able to pay its debts or other liabilities in
full;
If there exists no situation where an application for the
review of insolvency of the company is pending under the
prevailing law on insolvency or where the company would
be in any manner subject to an insolvency proceeding
under the prevailing law on insolvency;
If the directors of the company, have, after due inquiry,
made a declaration in writing that the company is able to
pay its debts and other liabilities in full and that the debts
and liabilities to be paid on behalf of such company can be
paid up or can be fully settled in any other process within
one year from the date of the adoption of the resolution to
liquidate the company;
If the written declaration made by the directors pursuant to
Clause (c) was presented in the general meeting called to
discuss the matter of liquidation of the company or such
declaration was made at the time of discussions on that
matter in the general meeting.
(3) A copy of the special resolution adopted with respect to the
liquidation of a company pursuant to this Section and a written declaration of
directors shall be submitted to the Office in later than seven days after the date
of adoption of the resolution.
127. Appointment of liquidator and auditor: (1) While adopting a resolution to
liquidate a company pursuant to Section 126, the company shall appoint a
liquidator.
(2) While appointing a liquidator pursuant to Sub-section (1), a
practitioner licensed under the prevailing law on insolvency shall be appointed
as liquidator to conduct the liquidation proceedings and fix remuneration
receivable by such liquidator .
(3) The company shall give information of the appointment of a
liquidator pursuant to Sub-section (2) to the Office no later than seven days
after the date of such appointment.
(4) After a liquidator is appointed pursuant to Sub-section (2), the
directors and officers of the company shall relieved of their office and the
liquidator shall exercise all such powers with respect to the operation and
management of company as may be exercisable by the directors and officers of
the company.
(5) The service of employees of a company shall, ipso facto, be
terminated after the liquidator commences the operation and management of
the company pursuant to Sub –section (4).
Provided, however, that the liquidator may retain or appoint necessary
employees for his/her support and assistance.
(6) The liquidator appointed pursuant to this Section shall complete the
liquidation proceedings of the company within the period of time specified at
the time of his/her appointment.
Provided, however, that in the case where the liquidation proceedings
cannot be complete for any reason within the specified period of time, a
reasonable time limit may be extended by following the same procedure as
followed in his/her appointment.
(7) While appointing a liquidator pursuant to Sub-section (1), an auditor
shall also be appointed subject to provisions contained in this Act.
128. Application of prevailing law on insolvency: While liquidating a company
under this Chapter, the issue of whether any person is a creditor of a company
in liquidation shall be determined in accordance with the prevailing law on
insolvency.
129. Application to be made in the event of inability of company to pay
liabilities: If, after the liquidator has commenced proceedings of liquidation of
accompany under this Chapter, he/she is satisfied that the company is insolvent
and is not able to pay debts required to be paid or discharge liabilities required
to be discharged in full he/she shall make an application to have a review of
insolvency of the company in accordance with the prevailing law on insolvency.
130. Power of liquidator too take into custody and under control property of
company: After a liquidator has commenced his/her act, the liquidator shall
take into his/her custody and under his/her control all property, accounts and all
records and documents of the company.
131. Powers and duties of liquidator: (1) The liquidator appointed under this Act
shall, mutatis mutandis, exercise and perform all the powers and duties which
may be exercised and performed by a liquidator under the prevailing law on
insolvency.
(2) It shall be the duty of the liquidator to do the following acts, without
prejudice to the generality of Sub-section (1):
To prepare and submit to the office, the statements and
accounts of incomes and expenditures in the course of
liquidation in every six months after the appointment of
the liquidator;
To inform the shareholders of the company about the
progress on the liquidation proceedings in every six
months after the appointment of the liquidator;
To obtain and recover all properties or amounts required to
be obtained and recovered on behalf of the company and
repay and discharge the debts and other liabilities of all the
creditors of the company;
Following the completion of the act as referred to in
Clause (c) , to call the general meeting of shareholders and
present therein a proposed report and return on the
distribution of the remaining properties of the company to
the shareholders;
If the shareholders holding at least seventy five per cent of
the paid up share capital consent to the return as referred
to in Clause (d), to make payment of amounts to the
shareholders accordingly;
At the completion of liquidation proceedings, to prepare a
report on the properties recovered, payments made to the
creditors and distributions made to the shareholders, on
behalf of the company, and submit such report, certifying
that the company has been liquated, accompanied by the
auditor’s report, to the Office.
132. Cancellation of registration of company: (1) Upon receipt by the Office of a
report on the liquidation of a company pursuant to Clause (f) of Sub-section (2)
of Section 131, the Office shall strike the name of the company off the
company register and issue an order that the registration of the company has
been canceled.
(2) After the issue of an order on the cancellation of registration of a
company pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Office shall strike the name of such
company off the company register and publish in a national daily newspaper a
notice that such company has been dissolved.
⊕(3) Notwithstanding contained anything in this section, liquidator
appointed as per Insolvency Act, 2063, shall send to the office regarding the
information completion of cancellation process of the cancel such company.
⊕(4) Upon receiving the information pursuant to Sub-section (3) the
office, shall keep record of cancellation such company and after such record
the company shall deemed to be cancelled.
133. Power of creditor and shareholder to make complaint: If any creditor or
shareholder of a company thinks that there is any irregularity in respect of any
act or action of the liquidator, while liquidating the company pursuant to this
Chapter, such creditor or shareholder may make a complaint to the court
against such act or action within fifteen days of the receipt of information
thereof .
134. Action to be taken in cases of fraud or deception: If a liquidator thinks that
any director, employee or shareholder of a company has committed a fraud or
deception against the company, the liquidator may take necessary legal action
against such person in accordance with the prevailing law.
135. Right of secured creditors not to be affected: The commencement of
liquidation proceedings of a company pursuant to this Chapter shall not be
deemed to prejudice in any manner the right of the secured creditors who have
lent moneys against the security of any property of the company to enforce or
otherwise deal with such secured property under the prevailing law.
⊕ Inserted by the Some Nepal Act (Amendment) Act, 2064

Chapter 11
Cancellation of Registration of Company
136. Power of Office to cancel registration: (1) The Office may cancel the
registration of a company in the following circumstance:
If the promoter of the company makes an application,
showing a reason for the failure to commence the business
of the company, and accompanied by the prescribed fees,
for the cancellation of the registration of the company:
If the company is in default in submitting to the Office the
returns as referred to in Section 80 or fails pay the fine as
referred too in Section 81 for three consecutive financial
years; or
If based on the proofs received in the course of
administration of the company, the Office has a reasonable
ground to believe that the company is not carrying on its
business or the company is not in operation.
(2) If it is required to cancel the registration of any company pursuant to
Sub-section (1), the Office shall, prior to the cancellation of registration, give a
notice, accompanied by the reason for such registration, to the concerned
company.
(3) While sending a notice to a company pursuant to Sub-section (2), the
notice shall be sent to the company at its registered office or to any office or
such company if the address of the registered office of such company is not
registered with the Office or if the office of the company is not located at the
address registered and to the memorandum of association of the company if
even address of such officer is not available to the Office or is not known.
(4) A notice given pursuant to Sub-section (2) shall also be published in
a national daily newspaper, as per necessity.
(5) If the company fails to make an application, specifying the reasons
that the registration of the company should not be canceled, within two months
from the date of receipt by the company of a notice pursuant to Sub-section (2)
or, despite the making of such application, the reasons specified are not found
reasonable, the registration of such company may be canceled.
(6) If the registration of a company is canceled pursuant to Sub-section
(5), information thereof shall be given to the concerned directors and shall also
be published in a national daily newspaper.
(7) If the registration of a company is canceled pursuant to Sub-section
(5), if there exists any kind of liability of the company, the liability of the
officer or shareholder of the company shall continue to exist; and nothing
contained in this Section shall be deemed to bar the instituting of necessary
legal action against them to have such liability fulfilled.
(8) The assets, rights, benefits or liabilities held in the name of the
company at the tine of cancellation of its registration pursuant to Sub-section (5)
shall devolve on its shareholders in the proportion of their shareholding.
Provided, however, that the title and ownership of any property which
has been held by the company as a trustee in favor of any other person shall to
devolve on the shareholders.
(9) If any debt to be repaid by or any liability to be
performed/discharged by the company of which registration has been canceled
pursuant to this Section cannot be settled from the assets, rights, or benefits
devolved on the shareholders pursuant to Sub-section (8), the shareholders,
directors or officers who were involved in the management of such company
and responsible for giving rise to the situation as referred to in Sub-section (1)
shall personally bear such remaining loan or liability.
(10) A company of which registration is canceled pursuant to this
Section shall not be allowed to carry on any business by the name of the same
company.
(11) Following the cancellation of registration of any company pursuant
to this Section, the Office shall return to the shareholders only such property, if
any, remaining after deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in the
cancellation of the registration of that company.
137. Restoration of registration of company of which registration was canceled:
(1) In the case of cancellation of the registration of a company pursuant to Subsection (5) of Section 136, where the company or its shareholder or creditor
makes a petition , setting out the reasons, to the Court to have the company
restored, no later than five years after the date of publication of the notice of
cancellation of registration of the company, the Court may, if the following
circumstance, order to restore the company and restore its name in the
company register:
If it appears that the registration of the company was
canceled while such company was carrying on its business;
If the Court considers it to be just to restore the name of
the company for the proper management of the assets and
liabilities of such company.
(2) In the event of restoration of a company by virtue of an order of the
Court pursuant to Sub-section (1), the company shall be considered to have
been in existence from the date of its registration.
(3) In issuing an order pursuant to Sub-section (1) , the court may issue
such orders and make an order to make such arrangements as it may consider
appropriate and necessary for restoring the company and all other persons into
the status quo ante as if the registration of the company were not canceled.
(4) Where a company is restored pursuant to Sub-section (1) and any
fine as referred to in Section 81 is to be paid, the company shall be restored and
its name reentered in the company register only after such fine is paid to the
Office.
(5) Where a company of which registration has been canceled pursuant
to Section 136 is restored pursuant to this Section, such company shall have the
following property reverted to it:
Any property received by its shareholders in such capacity
pursuant to Sub-section (8) of Section 136 by virtue of the
cancellation of registration of the company;
Where the property as referred to in Clause (a) has already
been sold and disposed of, the proceeds of such sale and
disposal.
Provided, however, that no property or amount
already employed in the payment of debt or liability of a
creditor shall be returned.

Chapter 12
Protection of Shareholders
138. Power to prevent directors and officers from doing unauthorized act: (1) If,
on behalf of a company, any director or officer of the company does any act
beyond his/her jurisdiction, any shareholder of such company may make a
petition to the Court to prevent such act.
Provided, however, that no petition may be made under this Section in
connection with any act or action done or taken or intended to be done or taken
for the fulfillment of any liability created from any act or action already done
or taken by the company.
(2) If, based on the report received by the Office pursuant to Section 124
in respect of any company, the Office thinks that the business of such company
could be carried on or is being carried on in such a manners to be prejudicial to
the rights and interests of any of or all shareholders of the company or any
specific class or group of its shareholders or that any act done or intended to be
done by the company or the failure of the company to do any act required to be
done has resulted in or would result in a prejudice to the interests of such
shareholders, the Office may make a complaint/ petition to the Court against
such company or its directors or officers.
(3) On receipt of a petition as referred to in Sub-section (1) or (2), the
Court may inquire into the concerned company or its directors or officers and
issue an appropriate order.
139. Remedy for act done against rights and interests of shareholders: (1) Based
on the ground that the business of a company is carried on or is likely to be
carried on in such a manner as to be prejudicial to the rights and interests of
any shareholder of the company or that any act done or intended to be done on
behalf of the company or the failure of the company to do any act required to
be done has resulted in or would result in a prejudice to the rights and interests
of any shareholder, such shareholder may make a complaint/ petition to the
Court for an appropriate order.
(2) A shareholder who makes a petition pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall
prove that the director, managing director, manager or any officer who
manages and controls the company has done or intends to do any act with
ulterior motive or made or intends to make undue discrimination, in
contravention of the memorandum of association or articles of association or
consensus agreement.
(3) On receipt of a petition as referred to in Sub-section (1), the court
may if, upon inquiring into the concerned company, director or officer, the
claim set forth in the petition appears to have reasonable, issue such order in
the name of the company as it thinks appropriate for providing remedy thereto.
(4) In issuing an order pursuant to Sub-section (3), notwithstanding
anything contained in the memorandum of association, articles of association
or consensus agreement, the Court may, without prejudice to the generality of
the said Sub-section, also issue the following order, namely:
Preventing the act and action done and taken against the
rights and interests of any or all shareholders and carrying
of the business of the company in the future in a due
manner;
Preventing any act and action being done and taken or
requiring to do any act not done or intended not to be done
by the company;
Requiring to institute, on behalf of the company a civil
case against any one, in pursuance of a direction given by
the court;
Requiring to buy back the shares of any shareholder in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this Act, by
reducing the capital of the company, and to return the
amount of such shares;
In the event of any loss and damage being suffered any
shareholder from a discrimination made against him/her,
requiring the company or the person making such
discrimination to pay compensation to the shareholder for
the same;
Liquidating the company;
Requiring the company itself or any other shareholder of
the company to purchase the shares held in the name of
any shareholder;
Recovering the loss and damage caused to the company or
its shareholders from the director or officer who has
caused such loss and damage;
Where the company is to buy back its own shares, issuing
an order to reduce the share capital of such company as if
the share capital of such company were reduced by it by
adopting a special resolution on reduction of share capital;
where the memorandum and articles of association of the
company is to be amended by virtue of such order, issuing
other appropriate order also to make necessary amendment
thereto.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) or (2), the
remedy available to a person who suffers any loss or damage because of the
fact that a company or its director or any person responsible for the
management or control of the company or its employee has failed to do any act
required to be done or done any act required not to be done or otherwise done a
discriminatory treatment shall not be deemed to be limited to this Section only;
and such person may institute an action, whether individually or jointly, on
behalf of him/herself or other shareholder, as well, to have any remedy
available under other prevailing law.
(6) Where a collective remedy is demanded pursuant to Sub-section (5),
the court may issue appropriate order with or without making necessary inquiry
into some or all shareholders of that class.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where the
court has issued an order in a manner that the company shall not make any
amendment to its memorandum of association or articles of association or shall
make an amendment to any specific matter for the protection of the rights and
interests of any or all shareholders, in such a case, no amendment shall be made
to the memorandum of association or articles of association without obtaining
prior approval of the Court.
(8) If a company makes any amendment to its memorandum of
association or articles of association by or pursuant to an order of the Court
under Sub-section (7), such amendments shall be deemed to be an amendment
adopted by a special resolution in the general meeting of the company.
(9) The Office shall make entry of the following orders issued by the
court pursuant to this Section in the company register:
An order issued for the reduction of share capital of a
company;
An order issued requiring any amendment to the
memorandum of association or articles of association of
the company.
(10) The provisions of this Section shall also apply to any person who
has not yet been registered as a shareholder of a company but the shares have
already been transmitted to his/her name through legal procedures as if such
person were a shareholder of the company.
140. Right to shareholder to institute case on behalf of company: (1) A company
may file in the Court a case against any director, office or shareholders or any
person having control over the company pursuant to the consensus agreement
to have any rights and interests of the company enforced.
(2) If the company concerned fails to institute a case under Sub-section
(1), any share holder holding two and half percent or more of the shares in the
paid-up capital of the company separately or jointly with two or more
shareholders holding five percent shares may, on behalf of the company, file in
the Court a case against any such director or officer or the person having
control over the company or any other person.
(3) While filing a case by a shareholder pursuant to Sub-section (2),
he/she shall state about what sort of effort he/she has made to persuade the
company to institute the case by itself.
(4) Where a case is filed pursuant to Sub-section (2), the Court may
decide whether it would be appropriate to keep on the case being run by the
shareholder or to get the company to take over the case, and if it is found
appropriate to get the company to take over the case, it may order the company
to take over the case.
(5) Any case once filed pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2) shall not be
capable of being dismissed or being compromised except in cases where such
compromise contains such terms ad conditions as specified by the Court.
(6) Where a case file pursuant to Sub-section (2) is adjudged sustaining
the claim made by the claimant shareholder, the expenses incurred by him/her
in the institution of such case and reasonable expenses made for the services of
legal practitioner shall be reimbursed by the company. Where such claim is not
sustained, such amount out of the expenses incurred by the defendant in
defending such case as the Court thinks appropriate shall be reimbursed from
the complainant shareholder.
141. Acquisition or sale of property: (1) A public company or its subsidiary
company shall, if the purchase or sale of any property by it results in the
following situation, give information thereof to the Office:
If the purchase of any property results in an increase in the
value of its property or the value of consolidated property
mentioned in the audited latest annual financial statement,
by more than fifteen per cent;
If the income to be earned from the property sold or
intended to be sold exceeds by more than fifteen per cent
of the consolidated income before making payment for tax
as mentioned in the audited latest books of account of the
company.
(2) Any information to be given to the Office pursuant to Sub-section (1)
shall set out the following matters; and where such matters are also applicable
in the case of transaction of the company, such matters shall also be stated in
the report of board of directors:
date of, and parties involved in, the transaction;
Details about the nature of property, and if that property
includes, wholly or partly, any shares issued by any other
company, the name of company issuing such shares and
the nature of business to be carried on by that company;
Value of the transaction , and other terms and conditions
of the transaction;
The ground pursued for the valuation of property, while
buying or selling any property;
In the event of sale of any property, matter whether the
proceeds of such sale is more or less than the book value
of such property as shown in the records thereof.

Chapter 13
Holding and Subsidiary Companies
142. Control over subsidiary company: (1) A holding company may control its
subsidiary company as follows:
By holding direct or indirect control over the formation of
the board of directors;
By holding majority shares of the company.
(2) If any company becomes a subsidiary company of any other
subsidiary company, the former company shall also be a subsidiary company of
the holding company controlling the later company.
(3) Despite that the shares of a company are subscribed by any agent on
behalf of the holding company or its subsidiary company or that the right to
appoint directors of such company is exercised by any person nominated on
behalf of the holding company or its subsidiary company, the conditions
mentioned in Sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been fulfilled.
Provided, however, that while determining a holding company and a
subsidiary company, the shares possessed in the following circumstances shall
not be recognized for this purpose:
In cases where any company is entitled to exercise any power on
the basis of holding debentures or a trust deed on the issue of
debentures or having subscribed shares;
In cases where a company lending credit has accepted the
shares by way of security.
143. Documents to be enclosed: (1) Any holding company shall enclose the
following documents of its subsidiary company in its balance sheet:
One copy of the annual accounts of the subsidiary
company for the immediately expired financial year and
the report of its board of directors during that period;
Auditor’s report;
Details of the investment of the holding company in the
subsidiary company at he end of the financial year;
In cases where the financial year of the holding company
and that of the subsidiary company are different, the
matter of change, if any, in any manner, of the right of the
holding company over the subsidiary company during
such different periods.
(2) The details as referred to in Clause (b) of Sub-section (1) shall also
contain the net profits derived after deducting the loss suffered in the concerned
financial year of the subsidiary company and the profit and loss as well which
has not been mentioned in the accounts of the company after it has become the
subsidiary company but which may be the concern of the shareholders of the
holding company.
(3) In cases where the board of directors of the holding company fails to
obtain the information as mentioned in Clause (b) of Sub-section (1), and Subsection (2) due to any reason, the balance sheet of the holding company shall
contain a written report thereof.
(4) The details as referred to in Clause (c) of Sub-section (1) shall also
show the loans borrowed against the mortgage of any immovable property of
the subsidiary company or the loans borrowed for any purpose other than
discharging the existing liabilities.
144. Prohibition on investment in holding company: No subsidiary company;
shall purchase these shares or debentures of the holding company or make
investment in the holding company in any other manner.

Chapter 14
Special Provisions relating to Private Companies
145. Consensus agreement: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the
following matters may be provided for in a consensus agreement of a private
company:
Management, business and transaction of the company;
Restriction, if any, on the transfer of shares;
Power of one or more shareholders to liquidate the
company owing to any specific or incidental event or
voluntarily;
Division or use of voting right;
Terms of appointment of officers, employees , workers of
the company,
Matter as to who will be the directors, officers, or the
persons bearing the ultimate responsibility or the chief
executive, of the company;
Mode of payment or distribution of dividends;
Matter that there shall be no board of directors;
Matter that , if there shall be no board of directors, who
shall perform such functions as required to be performed
by the board of directors under this Act;
If the annual general meeting is not required to be held,
provisions pertaining thereto;
Types of shares and the provision of shares with different
right, if any.
(2) The consensus agreement may be amended with the consent in
writing of all parties to the agreement.
(3) The shareholders who, after the conclusion of a consensus agreement,
have obtained the shares as follows shall be deemed to have consented to the
agreement and become party thereof:
where the shares have been obtained by way of donation
or gift;
Where the shares have been obtained in any other manner,
with the knowledge of the existence of such agreement at
the time of obtaining the shares.
146. Power of shareholder to inspect books of account: (1) Any shareholder of a
private company or his/her proxy may inspect the following documents or
records related with the transactions of the company during office hours:
Minute books of the general meeting and board of
directors;
Annual financial statements;
Share register; and
Accounts of the company.
(2) The director or officer of a private company shall make adequate
arrangement so that the shareholders could inspect the documents and records
as referred to in Sub-section (1).
147. Return of transactions: (1) Any shareholder of a private company may
demand the company for a return of transactions of the company for any
financial year.
(2) The director, managing director or officer carrying on the
transactions of the company shall provide a return accompanied by the certified
annual financial statement no later than fifteen days of the demand of return
pursuant to Sub-section (1).
148. Holding of annual general meeting not required: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where a consensus agreement
concluded between the shareholders of a private company has a provision that
the annual general meeting of the company shall not be held, such private
company shall not be required to hold its annual general meeting during the
period of such agreement.
(2) Where a consensus agreement is concluded with a provision that the
annual general meeting shall not be held pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
company shall also make provisions on the procedure of making decision on
such matters as required to be decided by the general meeting under this Act
and on the authority of making such decision
149. Adoption of written resolution by private company: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, except as otherwise provided in the
articles of association ,any act which can be done by adopting a resolution
including a special resolution in the general meeting of a private company or
by adopting a resolution in the meeting of any particular class of shareholders
can be done by a written resolution executed and signed by all shareholders
representing at least seventy five percent shares, who are entitled to vote in
holding discussion on such resolution on the same date on which such
resolution is deemed to have been adopted.
(2) Where separate written resolutions have been recorded for any
reason for the purposes of a Sub-section (1) and all such documents have the
same contents, it shall not be necessary that all shareholders sign the same
document;; and despite the fact that every shareholder has signed a separate
document, such document shall be valid as if one written resolution were
signed.
(3) Every shareholder signing a written resolution pursuant to this
Section shall date the same; and the last date on which the resolution is signed
by the shareholder shall be deemed to be the date on which the resolution has
been adopted.
(4) Any document attached to any written resolution shall be deemed to
have been presented in a meeting of shareholders signing the resolution.
(5) Any resolution accepted pursuant to this section shall be recognized
for any purpose whatsoever as it were a decision adopted by a general meeting
of a company or a meeting of any specific class of shareholders.
150. Deemed participation in general meeting: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, if, except, as otherwise provided in the articles
of association of a private company, any shareholder of the company makes
communication contact with all shareholders through any communication
means and takes part in communication contact with other shareholders in such
a manner that the other shareholders can hear or read whatever is spoken by
every shareholder, every shareholder who so takes part in such communication
contact shall be deemed to have taken part in the general meeting along with
other shareholders.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, where
any shareholder makes a complaint/petition accompanied by the prescribed
fees , to the Office no later than three months after the holding of a general
meeting, mentioning that he/she has not taken part in the general meeting, the
Office shall inquire into the concerned company; and, in holding such inquiry,
where the company fails to prove that the complainant shareholder has taken
part in such meeting, the decision made by that meeting shall not be valid.
(3) A meeting of shareholders conducted pursuant to Sub-section (1)
shall be deemed to have been conducted in the place where the chairperson of
the meeting is present.
(4) The provisions of Sub-section (1), (2) or (3) applicable to the general
meeting of a company shall also apply, mutatis mutandis, to the meeting of
directors or a sub-committee of directors of the company.
(5) After the completion of the general meeting pursuant to Sub-section
(1), the chairperson of the meeting shall prepare minutes of the proceedings
and decisions conducted and taken in the meeting annually and authenticate the
same.
151. Special exemption companies carrying on prescribed transaction: The
Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, exempt the
private company having turnover within the prescribed limit from the
provisions contained in Chapter-8.

Chapter 15
Provisions relating to Single Shareholder Companies
152. Single shareholder company not required to call meeting of the board of
director and general meeting: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Act, except as otherwise provided in the articles of association of a
single shareholder company, all acts and decisions required to be done and
made by the board of directors or general meeting of the company shall be as
decided in writing by such shareholder; and no meeting of the board of
directors or general meeting shall be required to be called.
153. Transfer and transmission of shares of single shareholder company: (1) In
the event of death of the shareholder of a single shareholder company, his/her
heir or the person acquiring the title to his/her shares shall acquire the right of
shareholder, and such heir or person shall do all such acts inclusive of the
transfer and transmissions of shares as the single shareholder can do under this
Act. While making a decision to transfer and transmit shares, the person so
acquiring the title shall make such decision in writing.
Provided, however, that if no heir to such shareholder is found, the
Office shall appoint a liquidator and liquidate the company in accordance with
the prevailing law.
(2) A person acquiring the title to shares pursuant to Sub-section (1)
shall give information thereof, accompanied by the evidence of such title, to the
Office no later than one month after the acquisition of such title.
(3) On receipt of the information as referred to in Sub-section (1), the
Office shall record the information by collecting the prescribed fees and give
information thereof to the person who acquires the title to shares.
(4) Where the number of person acquiring the title to shares pursuant to
Sub-section (1) is more than one, they shall be considered to be the directors of
company for the time being, except where the other heirs transfer the title to
only one heir, and the memorandum of association and articles of association
of the company shall be amended on that basis.
Provided, however, that where there arises a question of entitlement, such
matter shall be governed by a judgment of the competent court.

Chapter 16
Provisions relating to Foreign Companies
154. Registration of foreign company: (1) No foreign company shall carry on any
business or transaction in the Nepal without having a branch office of such
company registered with the office of such company registered with the office
pursuant to this Section or establishes such office without having a liaison
office registered.
Provided, however, that making investment in shares in any company
established pursuant to law, lending moneys to such company or participating
in the operation or management of such company, with the approval of the
competent body, shall not be deemed to be the carrying on of a business or
transaction for the purposes of this Chapter .
Explanation: Where any foreign company carries on any transaction for a
period of one month or more through an office established in Nepal or used
therefor or appoints any person for regular contact or avails its service, such
company shall be deemed to have done a transaction or established an office in
Nepal for the purpose of this Chapter.
(2) A foreign company desiring to have its branch office registered
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall make to the Office an application,
accompanied by the permission obtained from the concerned body pursuant to
the prevailing law, and the prescribed fees and in such format as prescribed, for
the registration of such company.
(3) A foreign company desiring to have its liaison office registered
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall make to the Office an application,
accompanied by the permission, if any, required to be obtained from the
concerned body pursuant to the prevailing law for the registration of such
office, and the prescribed fees and in such format as prescribed, for the
registration of such company.
Explanation: where any foreign company is selected by any competent body
pursuant to the prevailing law o r enters into contract with any competent body,
for any business in Nepal, the making of such selection entering into such
contract shall, for the purposes of Sub-sections (1) and (2) , be deemed to be
the permission given by the concerned body.
(4) On receipt of an application made for the registration of a foreign
company pursuant to Sub-section (2) or (3), the Office shall make necessary
inquiry, register such company and give the registration certificate, as
prescribed, no later than thirty days after the making of the application for
carrying on a business or transaction in or establishing a liaison office in the
Nepal.
(5) Where a foreign company cannot be registered pursuant to an
application made under Sub-section (2) or (3), the Office shall give information
thereof, setting out the reasons for the same, to the concerned applicant within
thirty days.
(6) A foreign company registered pursuant to Sub-section (4) may open
its branch office and carry on the concerned business or transaction in or open
its liaison office in the Nepal.
Provided, however, that a foreign company registered as a liaison office
shall not be entitled to do any income earning activity in Nepal.
(7) Where the name of a foreign company making application pursuant
to Sub-section (2) or (3) or the objective to be implemented by such company
is of such a nature that it cannot be registered pursuant to this Act, such foreign
company shall not be registered in Nepal.
(8) A foreign company registered pursuant to Sub-section (4) shall be
deemed to have been registered to carry on only the same type of business or
transaction as is being carried on by it in the country where its registered office
is situated or it has been incorporated.
(9) A foreign company registered pursuant to this Section shall put its
name board in the place of its business in a manner conspicuous to all,, and the
name of country where the company has been established and the registration
number of the company registered in Nepal shall be clearly mentioned in such
board and bills, receipts , invoices, etc or letter head to be used by the company.
(10) The office shall maintain a separate register for the registration of
foreign companies registered pursuant to this Section and make arrangements
for the inspection of such register by the general public and for getting a copy
thereof by paying the prescribed fees.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, a
foreign company registered pursuant to this Section shall not issue shares or
debentures within the Nepal.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act , a
foreign company which is carrying on a business or transaction or which has
established its liaison office in the Nepal without having been registered at the
time of commencement of this Act shall get it registered with the Office
pursuant to this Act no later than six months after the date of commencement of
this Act.
155. Submission of documents by foreign companies: (1) A foreign company
which makes an application for its registration or for the establishment of its
liaison office pursuant to Section 154 shall submit to the Office the following
details, along with the application:
Permission obtained by the foreign company from the
competent authority to carry on its business or transaction
in Nepal;
Copies of the charter, certificate of incorporation,
memorandum of association, articles of association of the
company, and Nepalese translation thereof;
Full name, address of the registered office and principal
place of business of the company, date of incorporation of
the company, description of the paid up capital and major
objectives of such company;
Names, addresses of directors, manage, company
secretaries or main officers of the company and
description of their citizenship;
Name and address of the person residing or staying in the
Nepal ,who is authorized by the company to receive, on its
behalf, any summons, notice etc. issued in the name of the
company;
Full address of the principal place where the company
carries on its transaction or business in Nepal and of the
office of the company situated in that place;
Where the company is to carry on any transaction or
business in the State of Nepal, details of the proposed
investment and transaction;
Where the company is to commence its transaction in
Nepal, the proposed date thereof;
A declaration made by a director of the company or
his/her representative, on behalf of the company, that the
matters contained in the returns submitted by the company
are true and correct;
Power of attorney as referred to in Section 157.
(2) Where any amendment or alteration is made to or in the contents of
any document submitted by any foreign company pursuant to Sub-section (1), a
notice, accompanied by the details of such amendment or alteration, shall be
given to the Office no later than thirty five days.
(3) While submitting any such documents issued outside Nepal or copies
thereof as required to be submitted pursuant to Sub-section (1), they have to be
certified pursuant to the law of the country of registration of the foreign
company.
156. Books of account, audit and annual report of foreign company: (1) Every
foreign company registered pursuant to Section 154 shall prepare an annual
financial statement, along with the balance sheet and profit and loss account, in
such a manner as to reflect the real situation of its transaction in Nepal, get it
audited and submit the same to the Office no later than six months after the
expiration of a financial year as if such company were a company incorporated
under this Act.
(2) Every foreign company shall submit to the Office a copy of the
annual financial statement, audit report and report of board of directors
prepared for every financial year pursuant to the law of the country where its
registered office is situated no later than three months after such statement and
reports have been finally prepared.
(3) The annual financial statement to be prepared by a foreign company
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall include the following details:
Statements prepared in a manner to show classifying the
particulars of the fixed, running and other properties held
in the name of the foreign company within Nepal;
clear details of cash held in the name of the foreign
company with a bank and financial institution situated in
Nepal;
Clear details of cash held in the name of the foreign
company with a bank and financial institution situated in
Nepal;
Total amount of loans and liabilities, if any, due and
payable by the foreign company to any person who is a
resident of Nepal or a Nepalese company registered under
this Act.
(4) Where any report and statement required to be submitted to the
Office pursuant to Sub-section (2), and any document required to be attached
therewith, are in a language other than the Nepali or English language, a copy
of authentic translation of such document into the Nepali or English language
shall also be attached therewith.
(5) A foreign company which has got its liaison office registered in
Nepal pursuant to Section 154 shall get certified by an auditor the statements of
salary, allowance and amounts paid to the employees, consultants or liaison
persons serving in such office, statements of deduction of tax from such
payment pursuant to the prevailing law, payment of rental and expenses for the
operation of such office and statements of deduction of tax from such payment
pursuant to the prevailing law, and submit the same to the Office no later than
three months after the expiration of a financial year.
157. Power of attorney: (1) A foreign company to be registered pursuant to Section
154 shall submit office copy of a power of attorney executed in the specified
format in accordance with the legal requirements of the country where the
company has been incorporated or its registered office is situated, hereby
appointing a person residing in Nepal as its authorized representative for the
purposes of the service of any summons or notice or authorizing such person
to receive any other lawful notices on a lawsuit or legal action instituted on
behalf or legal against the company .
(2) A power of attorney executed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall state,
inter alias that where any summons or notice on a lawsuit instituted on behalf
of or against the company or other legal notice is delivered to the authorized
representative, it shall be binding on the company for any purpose whatsoever.
158. Cancellation of registration and liquidation of a foreign company: (1)
Where a foreign company registered pursuant to Section 54 wishes to close
down the transaction which it is carrying on in Nepal and get its registration
canceled or where the competent authority, acting in accordance with the
prevailing law, prohibits such company from carrying on the transaction or
business within Nepal, such company shall make an application, accompanied
by the prescribed fees, o the Office for the cancellation of its registration.
(2) A foreign company which makes an application pursuant to Subsection (1) shall also submit, along with the application, an evidence and proof
confirming that there is no liability due and payable by such company too any
person, organization or governmental or non-governmental body in Nepal.
(3) In order to inquire whether the evidence and proof as referred to in
Sub-section (2) are true or not, the Office shall publish at least twice in a
national daily newspaper a notice inviting a claim, accompanied by evidence,
on any liability, if any due and payable by the company to any one, within a
period of twenty one days.
(4) Where any person makes a claim in pursuance of the notice
published pursuant to Sub-section (3), the concerned company shall submit to
the Office evidence or proof showing the settlement of such claim. Where the
claim made against such company pursuant to Sub-section (1) cannot be settled
from the assets of such company situated in Nepal, such company shall settle
the same from its assets situated outside Nepal.
(5) Where no claim is made by any one within the time limit as referred
to in Sub-section (3) or a proof is submitted showing than the claim made has
been settled pursuant to Sub-section (4), the Office shall strike the name of
such company off the foreign company register and give information thereof to
the concerned company.
(6) Where an insolvency process is initiated in respect of a foreign
company, which has been registered in Nepal pursuant to this Chapter, in
accordance with the law of any country out of the countries where such
company has been carrying on its transaction, the representative authorized by
such foreign company pursuant to Section 157 shall promptly give a notice in
writing thereof to the Office, and he/she shall also publish such notice in a
national daily newspaper to be published from Nepal for the information of the
general public.
Provided, however, that where an order for the cancellation of
registration of such company has already been issued, such foreign company
shall close its transaction or business in Nepal.
(7) Where any foreign company closes its transaction or business
pursuant to the proviso to Sub-section (6) , the prevailing law on insolvency
shall govern the transaction or business carried on by such company in the
State of Nepal .

Chapter17
Proceeding of Lawsuits and Punishments
159. Complaints and proceedings relating to cases under this Act: (1) In respect
of any matter under this Act, a case may be filed and proceedings taken only
with a complaint made by the Office or the director, officer, shareholder or
member or creditor of a company or any other concerned person.
(2) Except in cases where jurisdiction is expressly given to the Office on
any matter under this Act, the Court shall have power to hear and settle the
cases on offenses punishable under this Act, the mattes on which a complaint
or application can be made to the Court as mentioned in various Sections of
this Act and matters of compensation for amounts in controversy.
(3) In hearing and settling cases under this Act, the Court shall follow
the procedures as referred to in the Summary Procedure Act, 2028 (1972).
(4) An appeal against any decision or order made or issued by the Office
of Court under Sub-section (2) may be made to the Court as specified by the
Government of Nepal with the consent of the Supreme Court, within thirty-five
days.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section(2), pending the
specification of the Court by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette for hearing cases, suits and taking other actions pursuant to this
Act, the Company Board formed pursuant to Section 1691 shall assume the
jurisdiction of the concerned Court.
160. Punishment with fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees or with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or with both: The
following person who commits the following offense shall be punished with a
fine from twenty thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees or with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or with both punishments:
Where any director or officer of a company has caused any loss or
damage to the company or any person by mentioning any false matter in
any document of the Company, with mala fide intention or malicious
recklessness, such director or employee;
Where any director or officer of a company fails to maintain, or cause to
be maintained, hides or conceals or damage such books of account or
accounts as required to be maintained pursuant to this Act, such person;
Where the auditor of a company states a false matter in his/her report in
the course of carrying out his/her duty or omits necessary comments
while making audit, with mala fide intention or malicious recklessness,
such auditor;
Where, a liquidator does not convene the meting of creditors, or makes
payment of loans or liabilities contrary to the order of priority or fails to
maintain such books of account and accounts as required to be
maintained under this Act or fails to take over such books of accounts
and documents as required to be taken over, or maintains false accounts,
or fails to submit any report required to be submitted or fails to hand
over cash, goods in-kind or books to be handed over by him/her on the
termination of his/her assignment, with ulterior motive, recklessness or
mala fide intention, such liquidator;
Where any director or officer or employee fails to hand over the
documents, accounts, cash goods in –kind in this charge on the
termination of his/her office or on receipt of a order to liquidate the
company, to the successor or where the successor fails to take over them
pursuant to this Act, such director, officer and employee who do not
hand over or take over them;
Any director or officer who issues the prospectus of a company prior to
its being registered with the Office who gives false details in the
prospectus;
Where any act is done beyond the jurisdiction of the board of directors
or beyond the scope of work of the company, any director or officer who
does or orders to do such act;
Any shareholder who does not provide any returns pursuant to this Act
or gives false returns;
Any director or officer or employee who misappropriates or embezzles
cash or goods in-kind of the company or uses the cash or goods in-kind
of the company for his/her personal use without the approval of the
board of directors or the general meeting or does not settle advances
according to the rules of the company or does not abide by any order
issued by the Office or fails to submit any returns of the company;
Where any director or officer who has the duty to give any statements or
information to the company, Office, Court or other body pursuant to this
Act fails to give such statements of information, such director or officer;
An auditor who knowingly carries out auditing of the concerned
company even after that he/she is not qualified to carry out auditing of
any company;
An director or officer who exercises the powers not conferred to him/her
or acts beyond the authority conferred to him/her;
An director or officer who maintains account in contravention of this
Any director of officer who fails to provide such extracts of financial
statement, annual financial statement or report as required to be
provided to the shareholders pursuant to this Act;
Any director or substantial shareholder or company who receive or give
any loan facility or remuneration from the company in a manner to be
contrary to the provisions contained in this Act;
An company, officer, employee or any other person who, in seeking
approval of the Court to reduce the share capital of the company, lies or
hides the name of any creditor or gives false statements as to the loans
borrowed by the company;
An private company which sells shares or debentures in contravention of
this Act, directors and shareholders of such company;
An foreign company which carries on business or transaction in Nepal
in contravention of this Act, directors, employees or representatives of
such company;
A debenture trustee who acts contrary to the interest of the holders of
debenture, directors or officers of such trustee;
A person who acts contrary to Sub-section (7) of Section 26;
An director or officer who fails to do any act required to be done
pursuant to Section 60;
An person who carries on transaction by using the word “company”
without getting a company registered pursuant to this Act;
An company, director or officer who fails to provide the information or
notice as referred to in Section 141 or Section 175;
An shareholder of a company who does not provide such information as
demanded pursuant to Section 47 or the company, director and officer
who does not submit to the Office the information received from the
shareholder pursuant to that Section;
An director or officer who acts contrary to Section 105;
The managing director, director or officer of a company who fails to
provide the address of registered office of the company despite the
issuance of written order by the Office at various times or giving of such
notice through communication media, where such issuance was not
possible;
A company, director, substantial shareholder and officer who acts
contrary to Section 50.
161. Punishment with fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees: The following
person who commits the following offense shall be punished with a fine from
ten thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees:
Where any shares are allotted in contravention of the provisions of this
Act, the officer or person who makes such allotment;
Where a company purchases, out of the company’s capital in stock, its
own shares or the shares of its holding company contrary to this Act or
makes investment in contravention this Act, every director of that
company;
In the event of failure to show or provide the books if account to the
auditor as and when so required, the officer or person who has the duty
to do so or provide the same;
An auditor who does not present a report as specified in the Act;
An director, manager and officer who does not make arrangements as
referred to in Sub-section(3) of Section; 172;
An director and officer who violates the provisions of Section 146 or
147 or who does not maintain such records books or returns as required
to be maintained pursuant to this Act;
An company, director, auditor, officer and employee who violate the
provision contained in Chapter-18 or who fail to fulfill the duty and
obligations specified in that Chapter;
In the event of failure to call the general meeting or a meeting of the
board of directors required to be called pursuant to this Act or failure to
send a notice of the general meeting or a meeting of the board of
directors or failure to prepare the documents to be made available to the
shareholders before the holding or the general meeting or failure to
present in the general meeting such documents as required to be
presented, the director, officer or person who has the duty to maintain
or do such act or to call the meeting or to send such notice;
An officer who sets down any false deed or content of document stating
that any matter which was neither done or happened to have been done
or happened and vice versa in the minutes as referred to in Sub-section(1)
of Section 75 and Sub-section (7) of Section 97 or such other return or
report as required to be prepared an submitted to the company or Officer
in such notice or information as required to be provided pursuant to this
In the event that an declaration made by the directors pursuant to Subsection(2) of Section 136 is held to be false, the director who makes
such false statement;
An person who does false or wrong translation of any deed or document
required to be submitted by a foreign company to the Office pursuant to
this Act or any person who certifies the same.
162. Punishment with fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees: Except in
matters contained in Sections 160 and 161, the Court may impose a fine of five
thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees on any company or every
concerned director, managing director, manger, company secretary or
employee of the company who fails to perform any act which he/she is required
to perform under this Act or commits any act prohibited by this Act, or fails to
perform his/her duty, or performs even any permissible act upon the expiry of
the time-limit or without following the procedures, or fails to give such
information to the Office as required to be given, or fails to submit such returns
to the Office as required to be submitted.
163. Realization of amount of loss: If a director, officer of an company or a person
causes any loss or damage to the company or shareholder or creditor or any
other person by committing an offense punishable under this Act or by
violating any provision contains in this Act or the memorandum of association
or articles of association or consensus agreement, the aggrieved company,
shareholder, creditor or any person shall be entitled to have realized the amount
of such loss or damage. He /She shall personally bear the amount of such loss
or damage.

Chapter 18
Audit Committee
164. Audit Committee: (1) A listed capital with paid up capital of thirty million
rupees or more or a company which is fully or partly owned by the
Government of Nepal shall form an audit committee under the Chairpersonship
of a director who is not involved in the day-to –day operations of the company
and consisting of a least three members .
(2) A person who is a close relative of the chief executive of a company
shall not be eligible to be a member of the audit committee formed pursuant to
Sub-section (1).
(3) At least one member of the audit committee shall be an experienced
person having obtained professional certificate on accounting or a person
having gained experience in accounting and financial field after having
obtained at least bachelor’s degree in accounts, commerce, management,
finance or economics.
(4) The report of board of directors required to be prepared by a
company shall set out a short description of the activities of the audit
committee, working policies adopted by the board of directors to implement the
suggestions, if any, given by the audit committee, the allowances or facilities ,if
any, received by the members or the audit committee and the names of the
members of audit committee.
(5) The audit committee may, for inquiring into any matter, notify the
managing director of the company, chief executive or the company or other
director, auditor, internal auditor and accounts chief involved in the day-to-day
operations of the company to attend its meeting; and it shall be their duty to be
present in the meeting of that committee if they are so notified.
(6) The board of directors shall implement the suggestions given by the
audit committee in respect of the accounts and financial management the
company; and where any suggestion cannot be implemented, the board of
directors shall also mention the reasons for the same in its report.
(7) A company shall arrange for such means and resources as may be
adequate for the fulfillment of responsibilities of the audit committee; and the
audit committee may fix its internal rules of procedures on its own.
(8) The chairperson of the audit committee shall be present in the annual
general meeting of the company.
(9) The audit committee shall meet as per necessity.
165. Functions, duties and powers of audit committee: The functions, duties and
powers of the audit committee formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) of Section
164 shall be as follows:
To review the accounts and financial statements of the company and
ascertain the truth of the facts mentioned in such statements;
To review the internal financial control system and the risk management
system of the company;
To supervise and review the internal auditing activity or the company;
To recommend the names of potential auditors for the appointment of
the auditor of the company, fix the remuneration and terms and
conditions of appointment of the auditor and present the same in the
general meeting for the ratification thereof;
To review and supervise as to whether the auditor of the company has
observed such conduct, standards and directives determined by the
competent body pursuant to the prevailing law as required to be
observed in the course of doing auditing work;
Based on the conduct, standard and directives determined by the
competent body pursuant to the prevailing law, to formulate the polices
required to be observed by the company in respect of the appointment
and selection of the auditor;
To prepare the accounts related policy of the company and enforce, or
cause to be enforced, the same;
Where any regulator body has provided for the long term audit report to
be set out in the audit report o f the company, to comply with the terms
required to prepare such report;
To perform such other terms as prescribed by the board of directors in
respect of the accounts, financial management and audit of the company.

Chapter19
Provisions relating to Companies Not Distributing Profits
166. Establishment of company not distributing profits: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, any company may be incorporated to
develop and promote any profession or occupation or to protect the collective
rights and interests of the persons engaged in any specific profession or
occupation or to carry on any enterprise for the attainment of any scientific,
academic, social, benevolent or public utility or welfare objective on the
condition of not distributing dividends.
(2) Any person or trustee of a public trust registered pursuant to the
prevailing law or any other corporate body incorporated pursuant to the
prevailing law who wishes to register a company for the attainment or the
objective mentioned din Sub-section(1) may make an application to the Office
pursuant to Section 4.
(3) The number of promoters promoting a company pursuant to subsection (1) shall be at least five; and after the incorporation such company,
it may have any number of its members, with a minimum of five members.
(4) The membership of a company incorporated pursuant to Sub-section
(1) shall not be transferable in any manner. The membership of any person or
body shall ipso facto be terminated in the event of death, cancellation of
registration or dissolution of such member or amalgamation of such member
with another body or company.
(5) Except with the prior approval of the Office, a company incorporated
pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall not add words such "company", "limited" or
"private limited" at the end of its name.
(6) A company registered pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall obtain
approval of the Office to expand its branch.
167. Special provisions relating to company not distributing profits: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the prevailing law, the
following matters of a company incorporated pursuant to Section 166 shall be
as follows:
There shall not be required share capital to incorporate a
company not distributing profits.
Provided, however, that the company may receive
membership fees from its members and receive any
donation, gift pursuant to law for the accomplishment of
its objectives.
No member of the company shall be liable for the debts
and liabilities of the company except in the case where any
member accepts such liability in writing the liability of the
company, with specification of the limit of such liability;
his/her liability shall be limited to the extent of that limit.
All the provisions of this Act as applicable to the listed
company, other than those provisions which may be
applicable only to the company with share capital, shall
also apply to the company, its director, officer, auditor and
employee.
The company shall not distribute dividend, bonus or any
other amount, from the profits earned by it, to its members
or employees; and the profits earned by the company shall
be used to increase the capital of the company or for the
attainment of its objectives.
The company shall obtain prior approval of the Office
to change objectives.
Any company not distributing profits shall not be merged
with any company distributing profits.
The members of a company incorporated under this
Chapter shall elect the directors from amongst themselves
in such number as fixed in the articles of association, on
the basis of one member one vote.
The meeting allowance, salary, facility receivable by the
officers or a company incorporated under this Chapter and
the incorporation and operational expenses of the company
shall not exceed the amount as specified by the Office; and
in so specifying expenses, the Office shall have regard to
the capital situation and profits of such company.
In the event of liquidation of or cancellation of registration
of a company incorporated under this Chapter ,the assets
of the company, if any , remaining after the settlement of
the debts and liabilities of the company shall be dealt with
as per the provision, if any, contained in its articles of
association, and failing such provision, such assets shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal .
Provided, however, that such assets shall, in no way,
devolve on any body or company where a promoter or
member of such company or his/her close relative or close
relative of such relative is a promoter or member.
(2) In the event of violation of any provision contained in Sub-section
(1), the Office may cancel the registration of the company committing such
violation.
Provided, however, that the company shall be provided with an
opportunity to defend itself, prior to such cancellation of registration.
(3) A person who is not satisfied with a decision on cancellation of
registration made by the Office pursuant to Sub-section (2) may file a
complaint in the Court within thirty five days after the receipt of information of
such decision.
(4) While canceling the registration pursuant to Sub-section (2), the
Office shall appoint a liquidator and an auditor to complete the liquidation
proceedings of such company, specifying the period for completion of such
liquidation proceedings.
(5) The liquidator and auditor appointed pursuant to Sub-section (4)
shall discharge their functions in accordance with the provisions contained in
this Act and the prevailing law.

Chapter20
Interim Provisions relating to Company Advisory Board and Company Board
168. Formation of Company Advisory Board: (1) The Government of Nepal shall,
by a notification published in the Nepal Gazette, form a Company Advisory
Board comprising a maximum of nine members consisting of one person from
each of the fields of law, accounting profession, tax administration, commerce
or trade administration, from amongst those who have done at least master’s
degree in the respective fields and gained expertise after having served for at
least seven years in such fields in the government and private sectors, as well
as a representative of the Federation of Nepalese Chamber of Commerce and
Industries, so as to study the practical problems coming across in the field of
implementation of this Act and prevailing law relating to company
administration and give advice, as required, to the Government of Nepal on
timely reforms to be made in the prevailing companies law and reforms in the
company administration. The Registrar shall be the member secretary of the
Company Advisory Board.
(2) While forming the Company Advisory Board pursuant to sub –
section (1), the notification shall designate any one of the members of the
Board also to act as its chairperson.
(3) The Company Advisory Board shall submit to the concerned
Ministry of the Government of Nepal, an annual report on the activities carried
out by it pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(4) The concerned Ministry shall publish the report submitted pursuant
to Sub-section (3) and make arrangement so that the general public can obtain a
copy of such report at a reasonable price.
169. Provisions relating to Company Board: (1) Pending the designation of a
court by the Government of Nepal pursuant to the provisions contained in this
Act, the Government of Nepal shall, by a notification published in the Nepal
Gazette, form a three–member Company Board, consisting the Chairperson and
member, as follows:
A person who is a District Judge or who has
already been a District Judge or who is qualified
for appointment as District Judge, with each
such person, having done bachelor degree in
law and gained experience in commercial law
-Chairperson
A person who, after being registered as an
advocate pursuant to the prevailing law, has
done legal practice in the field of commercial
law for a least ten years or who has served in
the post of Gazetted Class Two of Nepal
Judicial Service for at least four years
-Member
A person who has done bachelor degree in
management, commerce or accounting and
worked in the field of company management,
tax administration or accounting for at least ten
years or an accounting professional who has
obtained
professional
certificate
accounting and gained at least five years of
experience in accounting profession
-Member
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Clauses (a) , (b), (c), or (d) of
Sub-section (1), the Government of Nepal may, by a notification published in
the Nepal Gazette , designate any member, out of the members of the
Company Advisory Board formed pursuant to Section 168, who has the
qualification as mentioned in the said Clauses, also to act as the Chairperson or
a member of the Company Board to be formed pursuant to this Section.
(3) The Board formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2) shall exercise
the jurisdiction conferred to the Court pursuant to this Act.
(4) The company Board formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) or (2) shall,
while hearing and settling the cases pursuant to Sub-section (3) ,exercise its
jurisdiction as follows:
Three members shall jointly exercise their jurisdiction.
Provided, however, that, where the Chairperson and
another one member are present, the case may be heard
and settled, and where other two members except the
Chairperson are present, the case may be heard.
In the event of the presence of all the three members, the
unanimous opinion of all the three members or the
majority opinion of two members shall be deemed to be
the decision of the Company Board.
In the event of the presence of two members only, where
the two members have the same opinion, that opinion shall
be the decision of the Company Board.
In the event of the presence of two members, where they
lack unanimity in opinion, the opinion of the Chairperson,
where the Chairperson as well is present, and where the
other members except the Chairperson are present, the
opinion of the senior member shall prevail in the matters
of proceedings; and in the case of judgment or final order,
it shall be submitted to the member who was absent earlier
on the opinion supported by him/her shall be deemed to be
the decision of the Company Board.
Where all the three members are present and each has a
different opinion or where majority cannot be established
even after making submission to the member who was
absent earlier pursuant to Clause (d), the opinion of the
Chairperson shall prevail in the case of proceedings, and
in the case of the judgment or final order, a reference shall
be made to the Court hearing appeal.
(5) The Company Board may, considering the workload of cases, locate
itself in any other place in Nepal for any specific period and hear and settle the
cases.
(6) The Company Board shall follow the procedures referred to in the
Summary Procedure Act, 2028 (1972) while hearing and settling the cases.
(7) A party who is not satisfied with a decision made by the Company
Board on any case pursuant to this Section may make an appeal to the
concerned Appellate Court within thirty five days after the date of the receipt
of information of such decision.
(8) The remuneration, facilities and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and member appointed or designated pursuant to
this Section shall be as prescribed.
Provided, however, that the terms and conditions of service shall not be
prescribed in manner to reduce the remuneration and facilities once already
provided.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), the
company board formed pursuant to the Companies Act, 2053 (1996) an
existing at the time of the commencement of this Act shall continue to exist
pending the formation of the Company Board as referred to in this Act.
(10) The cases, and petitions related thereto, filed in and under
consideration of or yet to be decided by the company board as referred to in
Sub-section (9) at the time of commencement of this Act shall , after the
commencement of this Act, be transferred to the Company Board as referred to
in this Section; and such cases shall be heard and settled by such Board.
170. Provisions relating to secretariat and employee of Company Advisory
Board and Company Board: (1) The secretariat of the Company Advisory
Board to be formed pursuant to Section 168 shall be situated in the Company
Register’s Office.
(2) The secretariat o the Company Board to be formed pursuant to

Section 169 shall be situated in the Ministry of Industries.
(3) The secretariat of the Company Board shall have such number of
employees as specified by the Government of Nepal.
171. Dissolution of Company Board: (1) The Company Board formed pursuant to

Section 169 shall ipso facto be dissolved on the date on which the Government
of Nepal designates the Court as referred to in this Act, by a Notification
published in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) On the dissolution of the Company Board pursuant to Sub-section
(1), the appointment of the Chairperson, members and other employees serving
in the Board shall ipso facto be terminated; and no compensation or additional
amount shall be paid to them for such termination where any employee were
deputed by other offices to the Board, their deputation shall ipso facto be
terminated.
(3) On the dissolution of the Company Board pursuant to Sub-section
(1), all cases, and petitions related thereto, filed in and under consideration of
or yet to be decided by the Board under this Act shall be transferred to the
Court .

Chapter21
Miscellaneous
172. Record of company and use of computer: (1) The records of any minute
book, shareholders or debenture holders register, index of shareholders, books
of account, accounts etc. required to be maintained by a company pursuant to
this Act may be maintained either by making entries thereof in separate books
or by recording the same by any electronic communication device and
computer in a non-legible form or in any other manner, without prejudice to the
provisions contained in this section.
(2) In case where the records of any minute books, shareholder or
debenture holder register index of shareholder, books of account, accounts etc.
have not been maintained by making entries thereof in a record book but
maintained in any other manner, the following provisions shall be applicable.
If it is easily accessible to the place where the records of
such minute book shareholder or debenture register index
of shareholder books of account, accounts, etc. are
maintained and where such records can be inspected or
copes thereof can be obtained, such records shall be
deemed to have been maintained in any specific place.
The company shall make adequate arrangements that no
one can destroy or alter the records as referred to in Clause
(a) and that the matters recorded therein can be easily
traced and inspected and copies thereof can be obtained.
Where any matter has been so recorded that it is not
legible, the matter shall be capable of being reproduced in
a legible form.
(3) Where the records of any minute book, shareholder or debentureholder register, index of shareholders, books of account, accounts etc. are put in
an web site by using any electronic communication device or computer
pursuant to this section, arrangements shall be made so that the date of such
preparation of documents as well as the date of amendment thereto can be
easily seen.
(4) Where a company has maintained the records of any minute book,
register, index, books of account, accounts etc. maintained pursuant to this Act
in a non-legible form and any law establishes the obligation of the company to
allow such records for inspection or to submit copies thereof, then it shall be
the obligation of the company to make such arrangements that the relevant
portions of such records can be inspected and that copies thereof can be
submitted in a visible or legible form.
173. Conversion of corporation owned by government of Nepal into Company:
(1) If the Government of Nepal wishes to convert a public corporation
incorporated under the prevailing law, fully or partly owned by the
Government of Nepal, or a development board formed under the Development
Board Act, 2013 (1956) into a company, such corporation or board can be
converted into a public company and incorporated under this Act.
(2) Not withstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, there
shall be no restriction on the number of promoter, shareholders, in the
incorporation of a company as referred to in Sub-section (1).
(3) The movable and the immovable properties of the corporation or
board as referred to in Sub-section (1) may be valuated and converted into the
share capital of the company to be incorporate d pursuant to Sub-section (1),
and where such conversion is made, all assets and liabilities of such
corporation or board shall devolve on such company, except as otherwise
provided in the articles of associations.
(4) Not withstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the
number of directors of a company incorporated under this section shall be as
specified in the articles of association of the company; and no such directors
shall be required to subscribe any shares to become a director.
(5) A company as referred to in this section may sell its shares in bulk to
the private sector through the stock exchange or directly by negotiations.
174. Predecessor to handover charge to successor: Any director or any other
officer or employ of a company shall, on the expiry of his/her term of office,
hand over the documents in his/her charge to the successor director or officer
or employ who is appointed to replace him/her to perform his/her functions,
within thirty days from the date of such expiry; and if such predecessor hands
over such documents, the successor shall take charge thereof accordingly.
175. Transactions between associated companies: (1) Where an agreement or
arrangement is made between the following companies whereby any company
directly or indirectly provides loan or other kinds of financial assistance, pays
any liability, provides guarantee or any other kind of security to another
company or any other transactions other than an ordinary business transaction
is done between them, it shall be deemed to be a transaction between the
associated companies:
Any company and its holding company;
Any company and any subsidiary company of its holding
company;
A subsidiary company of any company and the holding
company of such company;
A subsidiary company of any company and another
subsidiary company of its holding company.
(2) Where any transactions as referred to in sub section (1) is carried on ,
the associated company shall give a notice on such transactions, also setting out
a following details to its shareholders and the Office as soon as possible:
Date of transaction and the parties involved in the
transactions;
Nature of transaction and where transaction such as
provision of a loan, provision of financial assistance and
furnishing security has taken place under such transaction,
the amount or the value thereof.
176. Restriction on transaction between companies: (1) No company shall, where
directly or indirectly, lend money to another company in excess of an amount
that is sixty percent of its paid-up capital and free reserves or an amount to be
set by hundred percent of its free reserves, which ever is the higher, give
guarantee for a loan borrowed by another company or make investment in the
securities of another company in excess of the said amount.
(2) Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to a
company carrying on banking or financial transaction, insurance company,
company with main objective to buy and sell securities, private company which
has not borrowed any loan from a bank or financial intuitions, company with
objective to provide infrastructure facility, and investment made by the holding
company in its fully owned subsidiary company, money lent by such holding
company to such subsidiary and guarantee given by such holding company for
a loan borrowed by such subsidiary and investment made in right shares issued
under this Act.
(3) Subject to Sub-section(1) , a company shall maintain the details, as
prescribed, on the moneys lent by it to another company, investment made by it
in such company or guarantee given by it for a loan borrowed by such another
company.
177. Merger of a company: (1) A public company may, by adopting a special
resolutions in its general meeting to that effect, be merged with another
company subject to Sub-section (3).
Provided, however, that, in the case of a private company it shall be as
provided in its memorandum of association, articles of association or consensus
agreement.
(2) A public company, upon merging into a private company or a private
company, upon merging into a public company shall stand as a public company.
(3) If a resolution for merger is adopted pursuant to Sub-section(1),such
company shall, within thirty days , make an application, setting out the
following matters to the Office for approval:
In the case of a public company, a copy of the decision of
the general meeting as referred to in subsection (1) ,and
in the case of private company , copies of the related
provisions contained in the memorandum of the
associations, articles of the associations, or consensus
agreement authorizing the merger;
Last balance sheet and auditors report of the merging
company;
A copy of the letter of consent in writing, of the creditors
of the merging company and of the merged company;
Valuation of the movable and immovable properties of ,
and actual details of the assets and liabilities of, the
merging company;
If the merging company and merged company have made
a decision as to the creditors and employees and workers
of the merging company, a copy of such decision;
The scheme of arrangement concluded between the
companies for merger with each other.
(4) Where the information as referred to in Sub-section (3) is given to
the Office, it shall study the matter given information and give its decision
within three months.
(5) On receipt of an approval from the Officer for merger pursuant to
Sub-section (4), all the assets and liabilities of the merging company shall be
deemed to have been transferred to the merged company.
(6) The office shall maintain separate records of the merging company
in the company registration book.
(7) Except as otherwise provided in the memorandum of association,
articles of association or consensus agreement of the company, a shareholder
who does not express his/her consent in writing to the unification or merger or
alteration in, or transfer of, shares of the company or the sale of entire assets of
the company shall be entitled to get the company’s assets valuated prior to
such unification, merger or alteration in or transfer of shares or sale of assets
and get return of the amount in proportion to the shares held by him/her from
the merging company.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
Office shall not give approval for the merger of a company if such merger
appears to create a monopoly or unfair trade restriction or to be contrary to
public interest.
178. Power to give directive: If the office receives information through any source
that any company, its director or officer or other employee has not done any
such act as required to be done pursuant to this Act or the memorandum of
association or articles of association or the consensus agreement, in the case of
a private company, or has committed or is going to commit any act in
contravention of this Act or the articles of association of the company, the
Office may ,by making or causing to be made an inquiry into the matter, give
necessary directive to the concerned company , its director, officer or employee
to do, or cause to be done, any act required to be done accordingly or to refrain
from doing any prohibited act; and it shall be the duty of the concerned person
to comply with such directive .
179. Bonus share: (1) A company may, by adopting a special resolution in the
general meeting, issue bonus shares to its shareholders, out of the amount
available for the distribution as dividend.
(2) Where a company is to issue bonus shares pursuant to Sub-section
(1), the company shall give information thereof to the Office before issuing
such shares.
180. Act done or action taken in contravention of this Act or the articles of
association to be void: Except as otherwise provided in this Act or the
memorandum of association or articles of association, where any act or action
required to be done or taken under this Act or the memorandum of association
or articles of association has not been done or taken or any act or action
prohibited the under has been done or taken by any company or in respect of
such company, such act or action shall be void.
181. Notice on business of company: (1) Where any notice is required to be given
pursuant to this Act, memorandum of association, and the person entitled to
such notice expresses, before or after the specified time, in writing that the
notice is not necessary, the notice shall be deemed to have been received.
(2) If any shareholder is present in any Meeting in person or by proxy,
he shall be deemed to have given up his/her right to receive a notice required to
be given to him/her pursuant to this Act, the memorandum of association or
articles of association.
182. Dividend: (1) Except in the following circumstance, dividend shall be
distributed to the shareholders within forty five days of the decision made to
provide dividend:
If any law prohibits the distribution of dividend;
If the right to receive dividend is subject to any dispute;
If, in a circumstance beyond control of the company or for
any reason, dividend cannot be distributed within the said
time-limit.
(2) A company fully or partly owned by the Government of Nepal may
distribute dividend only after obtain in prior approval of the Government of
Nepal; and the Government of Nepal may give necessary directive on the
matter of dividend to be distributed by such company.
(3) In the event of failure to distribute a dividend within the tine limit as
referred to in Sub-section(1), the dividend shall be distributed together with
the interest thereon at such rate as may be prescribed.
(4) The person whose name is maintained in the shareholder register at
the time of declaration of a dividend or his/her legal heir shall be entitled to
such dividend.
(5) A company shall not pay or distribute a dividend in any other
manner except out of the amount of profits set aside for the distribution of
dividend.
(6) Before paying or declaring a dividend out of the profits for any
financial year, a company shall have fully deducted the pre operation expenses,
the amount required to be depreciated in accordance with the accounting
standards fixed by the competent authority under the prevailing law, any
amount required to be paid or set aside out of the profits under the prevailing
law or the amount or accumulated loss in previous financial years.
Provided, however, that if the prevailing law requires the establishment
of a reserve or consolidated fund of any amount prior to distributing dividend,
any company which is required to comply with such legal requirement shall not
distribute divided without establishing such reserve or consolidated fund.
(7) Subject to the various provisions contained in this Section, the board
of directors of any company may, in the following circumstance, distribute
interim dividend out of the profits for the previous financial year:
where the articles of association contain a provision on the
distribution of interim dividend;
where the annual financial statement for the financial year
out of the profits of which year interim dividend is to be
distributed has already been certified by the auditor and
approved by the board of directors.
(8) No company shall pay or distribute any amount in cash or kind,
chargeable on its funds, to its shareholders, except a dividend approved by the
general meeting.
(9) The amount of dividend not claimed/received by any shareholder
even after the empery of a period of five years after the date of resolution
adopted by the company in its general meeting to distribute dividend shall be
credited to the investor protection fund to be established under Section 183.
(10) In crediting the amount as referred to company shall, prior to the
expiry of the period mentioned in that Sub-section, publish a notice in a
national daily newspaper inviting the concerned to receive the dividend, within
the tie limit of at least on month.
(11) A company shall credit the amount of a dividend to be distributed
to its shareholders pursuant to this Act to a separate account within forty five
days after the date of approval by the general meeting and pay the amount of
dividend out of that a account; and the company shall not use such amount for
any other purpose.
183. Investor protection fund: (1) Where any investor does not present a claim to
have refunded the amount invested in the shares of a company even within five
years, there shall be established an investor protection fund to which such
amount shall be credited.
(2) The amount credited to the fund established pursuant to Sub-section
(1) may be spent for the improvement in the capital market, investment policy,
companies law or law relating to trade, business and profession, training to the
employees of the Office or the company or in any other activity relating to the
company administration.
(3) The management an operation of the fund established pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall be as decided by a committee consisting of the Registrar,
the Chairperson of the Securities Board or his/her representative and one
representative appointed by the Securities Board from amongst the
organization operating the stock exchange.
(4) The Office shall maintain the records of expenses made out of the
fund established pursuant to Sub-section (1) and have the fund audited.
(5) Any amount obtained from the Government of Nepal, any donor
agency or any person or body may also be credited to the fund established
pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(6) Where any investor does not present a claim pursuant to Subsection(1) ,prior to crediting the amount to the investor protection fund, a
notice shall be published in a national daily newspaper inviting the concerned
to receive such amount, within the time limit of at least one month.
184. Office of company: (1) Every company shall place a signboard containing its
name and address in the Nepali language outside its registered office in a
manner conspicuous to all.
(2) Every company shall have the address of its registered office
registered with the Office within three months of its incorporation.
(3) A company may change the address of its registered office by giving
a prior notice to the Office.
(4) A company shall, after its registration, shall give information of its
contact address such as telephone, fax, email, etc. to the Office; and where such
address is changed, the changed address shall be made available to the Office
promptly.
(5) The Office may gradually prepare an index of addresses of the
registered offices of companies and addresses as referred to in Sub-section (4)
and keep such index open for inspection by the general public.
185. Appointment of company secretary: (1) A public company with the paid –up
capital of ten million rupees or more shall appoint to the pot of company
secretary a Nepalese citizen who has the qualification mentioned in Sub-section
(2) A Nepalese citizen who has worked in the related field for at least
two years after obtaining the professional certificate of company secretary
issued by a native or foreign body authorized to issue the professional
certificate of company secretary pursuant to the prevailing law or who has
worked in the related field or in the field of company management for at least
three years after doing at least bachelor degree in law, management ,commerce
or economics may be appointed to the post of company secretary.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to the company secretary
who is incumbent at the time of commencement of this Act for three years after
the date of commencement of this Act.
(3) No director of the concerned company shall be eligible to be
appointed as the company secretary of such company.
(4) A person shall not be appointed to the post of company secretary of
more than one company at the same time.
Provided, however, that this provision shall not bar the appointing of the
company secretary of any principal company to the post of company secretary
of the subsidiary company of such company.
(5) Where it is provided by this Act, the prevailing law or articles of
association that any act has to be done by or through the company secretary,
and the post of company secretary remains vacant in the company or any
reason the incumbent company secretary fails to do such act or shows has
inability to do such act, then any such employee of the company, who has the
qualification referred to in this Act, as designated by the board of directors to
do such act may perform such act in the capacity of company secretary.
186. Functions, duties and powers of company secretary: (1) It shall be the duty
of the company secretary to implement, or cause to be implemented, the
decisions made by the board of directors and the general meeting ad the matters
directed by the Office or the concerned bodies and to submit such returns,
documents, decisions etc. as required to be submitted by the company to the
Office or any other body pursuant to this Act or the prevailing law within the
specified period.
(2) Subject to this Act, the memorandum of association and articles of
association, the company secretary shall perform the following functions:
To call the meeting of the board of directors or the general
meeting;
To prepare the agenda to be discussed in the meeting of
the board of directors or the general meeting and send it to
the concerned directors or shareholders;
To maintain the records of, authenticate and take charge of,
the decisions of the meeting of the board of directors or
the general meeting;
To send a notice of the allotment of shares and a call on
shares pursuant to the decision of the board of directors;
To accurately an properly maintain, take charge of ,and
authenticate, the shareholder register and the records of
shareholders and debenture-holders;
To refer the matter to the board of directors or the chief
executive to record the pledge or mortgage of, and execute
the transferal or transmission of any shares or debentures;
In cases where a claim, petition, grievance, suggestion,
advice etc. has been made by any shareholder or
debenture-holder in writing ,to transmit such matter to the
board of directors or chief executive or Office or other
bodies; and to inform in writing the concerned shareholder
or debenture-holder of the results of any act and action
done and taken in regard thereto;
To perform such other functions as specified to be
performed by the company secretary under the prevailing
law or such other functions as prescribed.
(3) Except as per the decision of the general meeting, the company
secretary shall not do, or cause to be done, any such act from or through the
company as is to yield benefits to him/her.
(4) The company secretary shall observe the code of conduct as
prescribed.
187. Validity of agreement between shareholders: (1) An agreement entered into
between the shareholders of a company in respect of the management,
operation of the company and the use of voting right conferred to them shall be
binding on them.
Provided, however, that if any provision of such agreement is prejudicial
to the interest of the company or its minority shareholders, such provision shall
ipso facto be invalid to the extent.
(2) The concerned shareholder shall submit two copies of the agreement
entered into under Sub-section (1) to the company within fifteen days after the
date on which such agreement was entered into. The company shall submit a
copy of the agreement so received from the shareholder to the Office within
fifteen days after the receipt of the same.
188. Effect of inoperativeness of the Companies Ordinance, 2062(2005): With
the Companies Ordinance, 2062 (2005) being inoperative, unless a different
intention appears, the inoperativeness shall not:
revive anything not in force or existing at the time at
which the Ordinance became inoperative;
affect the matter in operation as per the Ordinance or
anything duly done or any punishment suffered thereunder.
affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability
acquired ,accrued or incurred under the Ordinance;
affect any penalty, punishment or forfeiture incurred under
the Ordinance;
affect any action or remedy made or taken in respect of
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty or
punishment as aforesaid; and any such legal proceeding or
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced as if the
Ordinance were in force.

===== SOURCE: Constitution-of-Nepal(2072).pdf =====

THE CONSTITUTION OF NEPAL
Table of Contents
Preamble

Part-1
Preliminary

Part-2
Citizenship

Part-3
Fundamental Rights and Duties

Part-4
Directive Principles, Policies and Obligations of the State

Part-5
Structure of State and Distribution of State Power

Part -6
President and Vice-President

Part-7
Federal Executive

Part-8
Federal Legislature

Part-9
Federal Legislative Procedures

Part-10
Federal Financial Procedures

Part-11
Judiciary

Part-12
Attorney General

Part-13
State Executive

Part-14
State Legislature

Part15
State Legislative Procedures

Part-16
State Financial Procedures

Part-17
Local Executive

Part-18
Local Legislature

Part-19
Local Financial Procedures

Part-20
Interrelations between Federation, State and Local level

Part21
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority

Part-22
Auditor General

Part -23
Public Service Commission

Part-24
Election Commission

Part-25
National Human Rights Commission

Part -26
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission

Part -27
Other Commissions

Part -28
Provision Relating National Security

Part29
Provision relating to Political Parties

Part30
Emergency Power

Part31
Amendment to the Constitution

Part32
Miscellaneous

Part33
Transitional Provisions

Part34
Definitions and Interpretation

Part35
Short Title, Commencement and Repeal
Schedule1
National Flag of Nepal
Schedule -2
National Anthem of Nepal
Schedule -3
Coat of Arms of Nepal
Schedule -4
States and Districts to be included in the States
Schedule5
List of Federal Power
Schedule6
List of State Power
Schedule7
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation and State
Schedule8
List of Local level Power
Schedule9
List of Concurrent Power of Federation, State and Local level
The Constitution of Nepal
Date of Publication in Nepal Gazette
20 September 2015 (2072.6.3)
Preamble:
We, the Sovereign People of Nepal,
Internalizing the people's sovereign right and right to autonomy and self-rule, while
maintaining freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity, independence
and dignity of Nepal,
Recalling the glorious history of historic people's movements, armed conflict,
dedication and sacrifice undertaken by the Nepalese people at times for the interest of
the nation, democracy and progressive changes, and respecting for the martyrs and
disappeared and victim citizens,
Ending all forms of discrimination and oppression created by the feudalistic,
autocratic, centralized, unitary system of governance,
Protecting and promoting social and cultural solidarity, tolerance and harmony, and
unity in diversity by recognizing the multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious,
multi-cultural and diverse regional characteristics, resolving to build an egalitarian
society founded on the proportional inclusive and participatory principles in order to
ensure economic equality, prosperity and social justice, by eliminating discrimination
based on class, caste, region, language, religion and gender and all forms of castebased untouchability, and
Being committed to socialism based on democratic norms and values including the
people's competitive multiparty democratic system of governance, civil liberties,
fundamental rights, human rights, adult franchise, periodic elections, full freedom of
the press, and independent, impartial and competent judiciary and concept of the rule
of law, and build a prosperous nation,
Do hereby pass and promulgate this Constitution, through the Constituent Assembly,
in order to fulfil the aspirations for sustainable peace, good governance, development
and prosperity through the federal, democratic, republican, system of governance.

Part-1
Preliminary
Constitution as the fundamental law: (1) This Constitution is the fundamental
law of Nepal. Any law inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of
such inconsistency, be void.
It shall be the duty of every person to observe this Constitution.
Sovereignty and state authority: The sovereignty and state authority of Nepal
shall be vested in the Nepalese people. It shall be exercised in accordance with
the provisions set forth in this Constitution.
Nation: All the Nepalese people, with multiethnic, multilingual, multi-religious,
multicultural characteristics and in geographical diversities, and having
common aspirations and being united by a bond of allegiance to national
independence, territorial integrity, national interest and prosperity of Nepal,
collectively constitute the nation.
State of Nepal: (1) Nepal is an independent, indivisible, sovereign, secular,
inclusive, democratic, socialism-oriented, federal democratic republican state.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "secular" means religious,
cultural freedoms, including protection of religion, culture handed down from
the time immemorial.
The territory of Nepal shall comprise:
the territory existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution, and
such other territory as may be acquired after the
commencement of this Constitution.
National interest: (1) Safeguarding of the freedom, sovereignty, territorial
integrity, nationality, independence and dignity of Nepal, the rights of the
Nepalese people, border security, economic wellbeing and prosperity shall be
the basic elements of the national interest of Nepal.
Any conduct and act contrary to the national interest shall be
punishable by the Federal law.
Languages of the nation: All languages spoken as the mother tongues in Nepal
are the languages of the nation.
Official language: (1) The Nepali language in the Devnagari script shall be the
official language of Nepal.
A State may, by a State law, determine one or more than one
languages of the nation spoken by a majority of people within the State as its
official language(s), in addition to the Nepali language.
Other matters relating to language shall be as decided by the
Government of Nepal, on recommendation of the Language Commission.
National flag: (1) The national flag of Nepal consists of two juxtaposed
triangular figures with a crimson-coloured base and deep blue borders, there
being a white emblem of the crescent moon with eight rays visible out of
sixteen in the upper part and a white emblem of a twelve rayed sun in the lower
part.
The method of drawing out the flag and other particulars relating
thereto shall be as set forth in Schedule-1.
National anthem etc: (1) The national anthem of Nepal shall be as set forth in
Schedule-2.
The coat-of-arms of Nepal shall be as set forth in Schedule-3.
The Rhododendron Arboreum shall be the national flower,
Crimson Colour shall be the national colour, the Cow shall be the national
animal and the Lophophorus shall be the national bird of Nepal.

Part-2
Citizenship
Not to deprive of citizenship: (1) No citizen of Nepal may be deprived of the
right to obtain citizenship.
There is a provision of single federal citizenship with State
identity in Nepal.
To be citizens of Nepal: (1) The persons who have obtained the citizenship of
Nepal at the time of commencement of this Constitution and who are qualified
to obtain citizenship in accordance with this Part shall be the citizens of Nepal.
The following person who has his or her permanent domicile in
Nepal at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall be the citizen of
Nepal by descent:
(a) a person who has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by descent prior
to the commencement of this Constitution,
(b) a person whose father or mother was a citizen of Nepal at his or her
birth.
A child of a citizen having obtained the citizenship of Nepal by
birth prior to the commencement of Nepal shall, upon attaining majority,
acquire the citizenship of Nepal by descent if the child's father and mother both
are citizens of Nepal.
Every minor who is found within Nepal and the whereabouts of
whose father and mother are not known shall, until the father or the mother of
the child is traced, be a citizen of Nepal by descent.
A person who is born in Nepal from a woman who is a citizen of
Nepal and has resided in Nepal and whose father is not traced shall be provided
with the citizenship of Nepal by descent.
Provided that his or her father is held to be a foreign citizen, the
citizenship of such person shall be converted into naturalized citizenship as
provided for in the Federal law.
A foreign woman who has a matrimonial relationship with a
citizen of Nepal may, if she so wishes, acquire the naturalized citizenship of
Nepal as provided for in the Federal law.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article, in
the case of a person born from a woman who is a citizen of Nepal and married
to a foreign citizen, the person may acquire the naturalized citizenship of Nepal
in accordance with the Federal law if he or she has permanently resided in
Nepal and has not acquired the citizenship of a foreign country.
Provided that if such person's mother and father both are citizens of
Nepal at the time of acquisition of citizenship, such person born in Nepal may
acquire the citizenship of Nepal by descent.
In the cases other than those mentioned in this Article, the
Government of Nepal may, in accordance with the Federal law, grant the
naturalized citizenship of Nepal.
The Government of Nepal may, in accordance with the Federal
law, grant the honorary citizenship of Nepal.
Whenever any territory is acquired by way of merger into Nepal,
a person having his or her domicile in such territory shall become a citizen of
Nepal, subject to the Federal law.
Citizenship with identity of descent and gender: A person who obtains the
citizenship of Nepal by descent in accordance with this Constitution may
obtain a certificate of citizenship of Nepal with gender identity by the name of
his or her mother or father.
Acquisition, reacquisition and termination of citizenship: Other matters
relating to the acquisition, reacquisition and termination of citizenship shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.
Power to grant non-resident Nepalese citizenship: The non-residential
citizenship of Nepal may be so granted to a person who has acquired the
citizenship of a foreign country, has resided in a country other than a member
state of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, and who or
whose father or mother, grandfather or grandmother was previously a citizen of
Nepal by decent or birth but subsequently acquired the citizenship of the
foreign country that such person may enjoy economic, social and cultural
rights in accordance with the Federal law.
Other provisions relating to citizenship of Nepal: Other matters relating to the
maintenance of records setting out the identity of every citizen of Nepal and
the citizenship of Nepal shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

Part-3
Fundamental Rights and Duties
Right to live with dignity: (1) Every person shall have the right to live with
dignity.
No law shall be made providing for the death penalty to any one.
Right to freedom: (1) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal liberty
except in accordance with law.
(2) Every citizen shall have the following freedoms:
(a) freedom of opinion and expression,
(b) freedom to assemble peaceably and without arms,
(c) freedom to form political parties,
(d) freedom to form unions and associations,
(e) freedom to move and reside in any part of Nepal,
freedom to practice any profession, carry on any occupation, and
establish and operate any industry, trade and business in any part of
Nepal.
Provided that:
(1) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and
independence of Nepal or the harmonious relations between the
Federal Units or the people of various castes, tribes, religions or
communities or incite caste-based discrimination or untouchability
or on any act of disrespect of labour, defamation, contempt of court,
incitement to an offence or on any act which may be contrary to
public decency or morality.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (b) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and
independence of Nepal or the harmonious relations between the
Federal Units or public peace and order.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and
independence of Nepal, constitute an espionage against the nation or
divulge national secrecy or on any act of rendering assistance to any
foreign state, organization or representative in a manner to
undermine the security of Nepal or on an act of sedition or on any
act which may undermine the harmonious relations between the
Federal Units or on any act of incitement to caste-based or
communal hatred or on any act which may undermine the
harmonious relations between various castes, tribes, religions and
communities, or on any act of acquisition of, or restriction on,
membership of any political party on the basis solely of tribe,
language, religion, community or sex or on any act of formation of a
political party with discrimination between citizens or on incitement
to violent acts or on any act which may be contrary to public
morality.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (d) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and
independence of Nepal, or on any act which may constitute
espionage against the nation or on any act of divulgence of national
secrecy or on any act assisting any foreign state, organization or
representative in a manner to undermine the security of Nepal or on
an act of sedition or on any act which may undermine the
harmonious relations between the Federal Units or on any act of
incitement to caste-based or communal hatred or on any act which
may undermine the harmonious relations between various castes,
tribes, religions and communities or on incitement to violent acts or
on any act which may be contrary to public morality.
(5) Nothing in sub-clause (e) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may
undermine the interest of the general public or which may
undermine the harmonious relations between the Federal Units or the
harmonious relations between the peoples of various castes, tribes,
religions or communities or which may constitute or incite violent
acts.
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (f) shall be deemed to prevent the making of
an Act to prevent any act which may undermine the harmonious
relations between the Federal Units or any act which may be
contrary to public health, decency or morality of the general public
or to confer on the State the exclusive right to undertake any specific
industry, trade or service, or to prescribe any condition or
qualification for carrying on any industry, trade, occupation,
employment or business.
Right to equality: (1) All citizens shall be equal before law. No person shall be
denied the equal protection of law.
No discrimination shall be made in the application of general
laws on grounds of origin, religion, race, caste, tribe, sex, physical condition,
condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic condition, language
or region, ideology or on similar other grounds.
The State shall not discriminate citizens on grounds of origin,
religion, race, caste, tribe, sex, economic condition, language, region, ideology
or on similar other grounds.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of special
provisions by law for the protection, empowerment or development of the
citizens including the socially or culturally backward women, Dalit,
indigenous people, indigenous nationalities, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslim,
oppressed class, Pichhada class, minorities, the marginalized, farmers, labours,
youths, children, senior citizens, gender and sexual minorities, persons with
disabilities, persons in pregnancy, incapacitated or helpless, backward region
and indigent Khas Arya.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Part and Part 4, "indigent" means a
person who earns income less than that specified by the Federal law.
No discrimination shall be made on the ground of gender with
regard to remuneration and social security for the same work.
All offspring shall have the equal right to the ancestral property
without discrimination on the ground of gender.
Right to communication: (1) No publication and broadcasting or dissemination
or printing of any news item, editorial, feature article or other reading, audio
and audio-visual material through any means whatsoever including electronic
publication, broadcasting and printing shall be censored.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of Acts to
impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality of Nepal or the harmonious
relations between the Federal Units or the harmonious relations between
various castes, tribes, religions or communities, or on any act of sedition,
defamation or contempt of court or incitement to an offence, or on any act
which may be contrary to public decency or morality, on any act of hatred to
labour and on any act of incitement to caste-based untouchability as well as
gender discrimination.
No radio, television, on-line or other form of digital or electronic
equipment, press or other means of communication publishing, broadcasting or
printing any news item, feature, editorial, article, information or other material
shall be closed or seized nor shall registration thereof be cancelled nor shall
such material be seized by the reason of publication, broadcasting or printing
of such material through any audio, audio-visual or electronic equipment.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to prevent
the making of an Act to regulate radio, television, online or any other form of
digital or electronic equipment, press or other means of communication.
No means of communication including the press, electronic
broadcasting and telephone shall be interrupted except in accordance with law.
Rights relating to justice: (1) No person shall be detained in custody without
informing him or her of the ground for his or her arrest.
Any person who is arrested shall have the right to consult a legal
practitioner of his or her choice from the time of such arrest and to be defended
by such legal practitioner. Any consultation made by such person with, and
advice given by, his or her legal practitioner shall be confidential.
Provided this clause shall not apply to a citizen of an enemy state.
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, "legal practitioner" means
any person who is authorized by law to represent any person in any court.
Any person who is arrested shall be produced before the
adjudicating authority within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest,
excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to such
authority; and any such person shall not be detained in custody except on the
order of such authority.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person held in preventive
detention and to a citizen of an enemy state.
No person shall be liable for punishment for an act which was
not punishable by the law in force when the act was committed nor shall any
person be subjected to a punishment greater than that prescribed by the law in
force at the time of the commission of the offence.
Every person charged with an offence shall be presumed
innocent until proved guilty of the offence.
No person shall be tried and punished for the same offence in a
court more than once.
No person charged with an offence shall be compelled to testify
against himself or herself.
Every person shall have the right to be informed of any
proceedings taken against him or her.
Every person shall have the right to a fair trial by an independent,
impartial and competent court or judicial body.
Any indigent party shall have the right to free legal aid in
accordance with law.
Right of victim of crime: (1) A victim of crime shall have the right to get
information about the investigation and proceedings of a case in which he or
she is the victim.
A victim of crime shall have the right to justice including social
rehabilitation and compensation in accordance with law.
Right against torture: (1) No person who is arrested or detained shall be
subjected to physical or mental torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment.
Any act mentioned in clause (1) shall be punishable by law, and
any person who is the victim of such treatment shall have the right to obtain
compensation in accordance with law.
Right against preventive detention: (1) No person shall be held under
preventive detention unless there is a sufficient ground of the existence of an
immediate threat to the sovereignty, territorial integrity or public peace and
order of Nepal.
Information about the situation of a person who is held under
preventive detention pursuant to clause (1) must be given immediately to his or
her family members or relatives.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a citizen of an enemy state.
If the authority making preventive detention holds any person
under preventive detention contrary to law or in bad faith, the person held
under preventive detention shall have the right to obtain compensation in
accordance with law.
Right against untouchability and discrimination: (1) No person shall be
subjected to any form of untouchability or discrimination in any private and
public places on grounds of his or her origin, caste, tribe, community,
profession, occupation or physical condition.
In producing or distributing any goods, services or facilities, no
person belonging to any particular caste or tribe shall be prevented from
purchasing or acquiring such goods, services or facilities nor shall such goods,
services or facilities be sold, distributed or provided only to the persons
belonging to any particular caste or tribe.
No act purporting to demonstrate any person or community as
superior or inferior on grounds of origin, caste, tribe or physical condition or
justifying social discrimination on grounds of caste, tribe or untouchability or
propagating ideology based on untouchability and caste based superiority or
hatred or encouraging caste-based discrimination in any manner whatsoever
shall be allowed.
No discrimination in any form shall be allowed at a workplace
with or without making untouchability on the ground of caste.
Any act of untouchability and discrimination in any form
committed in contravention of this Article shall be punishable by law as a
severe social offence, and the victim of such act shall have the right to obtain
compensation in accordance with law.
Right relating to property: (1) Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the right
to acquire, own, sell, dispose, acquire business profits from, and otherwise deal
with, property.
Provided that the State may levy tax on property of a person, and tax on
income of a person in accordance with the concept of progressive taxation.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "property" means any form
of property including movable and immovable property, and includes an
intellectual property right.
The State shall not, except for public interest, requisition,
acquire, or otherwise create any encumbrance on, property of a person.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any property acquired by any
person illicitly.
The basis of compensation to be provided and procedures to be
followed in the requisition by the State of property of any person for public
interest in accordance with clause (3) shall be as provided for in the Act.
The provisions of clauses (2) and (3) shall not prevent the State
from making land reforms, management and regulation in accordance with law
for the purposes of enhancement of product and productivity of lands,
modernization and commercialization of agriculture, environment protection
and planned housing and urban development.
Nothing shall prevent the State from using the property of any
person, which it has requisitioned for public interest in accordance with clause
(3), for any other public interest instead of such public interest.
Right to freedom of religion: (1) Every person who has faith in religion shall
have the freedom to profess, practice and protect his or her religion according
to his or her conviction.
Every religious denomination shall have the right to operate and
protect its religious sites and religious Guthi (trusts).
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the regulation, by
making law, of the operation and protection of religious sites and religious
trusts and management of trust properties and lands.
No person shall, in the exercise of the right conferred by this
Article, do, or cause to be done, any act which may be contrary to public
health, decency and morality or breach public peace, or convert another person
from one religion to another or any act or conduct that may jeopardize other's
religion.
Right to information: Every citizen shall have the right to demand and receive
information on any matter of his or her interest or of public interest.
Provided that no one shall be compelled to provide information on any
matter of which confidentiality must be maintained in accordance with law.
Right to privacy: The privacy of any person, his or her residence, property,
document, data, correspondence and matters relating to his or her character
shall, except in accordance with law, be inviolable.
Right against exploitation: (1) Every person shall have the right against
exploitation.
No person shall be exploited in any manner on the grounds of
religion, custom, tradition, usage, practice or on any other grounds.
No one shall be subjected to trafficking nor shall one be held in
slavery or servitude.
No one shall be forced to work against his or her will.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of law
empowering the State to require citizens to perform compulsory service for
public purposes.
Act contrary to clauses (3) and (4) shall be punishable by law and
the victim shall have the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator in
accordance with law.
Right to clean environment: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to live in a
clean and healthy environment.
The victim shall have the right to obtain compensation, in
accordance with law, for any injury caused from environmental pollution or
degradation.
This Article shall not be deemed to prevent the making of
necessary legal provisions for a proper balance between the environment and
development, in development works of the nation.
Right relating to education: (1) Every citizen shall have the right of access to
basic education.
Every citizen shall have the right to get compulsory and free
education up to the basic level and free education up to the secondary level
from the State.
The citizens with disabilities and the economically indigent
citizens shall have the right to get free higher education in accordance with
The visually impaired citizens shall have the right to get free
education through brail script and the citizens with hearing or speaking
impairment, to get free education through sign language, in accordance with
Every Nepalese community residing in Nepal shall have the right
to get education in its mother tongue and, for that purpose, to open and operate
schools and educational institutes, in accordance with law.
Right to language and culture: (1) Every person and community shall have the
right to use their languages.
Every person and community shall have the right to participate in
the cultural life of their communities.
Every Nepalese community residing in Nepal shall have the right
to preserve and promote its language, script, culture, cultural civilization and
heritage.
Right to employment: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to employment.
The terms and conditions of employment, and unemployment benefit shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.
Every citizen shall have the right to choose employment.
Right to labour: (1) Every labourer shall have the right to practice appropriate
labour.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "labourer" means a labourer
or worker who does physical or mental work for an employer in consideration
for remuneration.
Every labourer shall have the right to appropriate remuneration,
facilities and contributory social security.
Every labourer shall have the right to form and join trade unions
and to engage in collective bargaining, in accordance with law.
Right relating to health: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to free basic
health services from the State, and no one shall be deprived of emergency
health services.
Every person shall have the right to get information about his or
her medical treatment.
Every citizen shall have equal access to health services.
Every citizen shall have the right of access to clean drinking
water and sanitation.
Right relating to food: (1) Every citizen shall have the right relating to food.
Every citizen shall have the right to be safe from the state of
being in danger of life from the scarcity of food.
Every citizen shall have the right to food sovereignty in
accordance with law.
Right to housing: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to an appropriate
housing.
No citizen shall be evicted from the residence owned by him or
her nor shall his or her residence be infringed except in accordance with law.
Rights of women: (1) Every woman shall have equal lineage right without
gender based discrimination.
Every woman shall have the right to safe motherhood and
reproductive health.
No woman shall be subjected to physical, mental, sexual,
psychological or other form of violence or exploitation on grounds of religion,
social, cultural tradition, practice or on any other grounds. Such act shall be
punishable by law, and the victim shall have the right to obtain compensation
in accordance with law.
Women shall have the right to participate in all bodies of the
State on the basis of the principle of proportional inclusion.
Women shall have the right to obtain special opportunity in
education, health, employment and social security, on the basis of positive
discrimination.
The spouse shall have the equal right to property and family
affairs.
Rights of the child: (1) Every child shall have the right to name and birth
registration along with his or her identity.
Every child shall have the right to education, health,
maintenance, proper care, sports, entertainment and overall personality
development from the families and the State.
Every child shall have the right to elementary child development
and child participation.
No child shall be employed to work in any factory, mine or
engaged in similar other hazardous work.
No child shall be subjected to child marriage, transported
illegally, abducted/kidnapped or taken in hostage.
No child shall be recruited or used in army, police or any armed
group, or be subjected, in the name of cultural or religious traditions, to abuse,
exclusion or physical, mental, sexual or other form of exploitation or improper
use by any means or in any manner.
No child shall be subjected to physical, mental or any other form
of torture in home, school or other place and situation whatsoever.
Every child shall have the right to juvenile friendly justice.
The child who is helpless, orphan, with disabilities, conflict
victim, displaced or vulnerable shall have the right to special protection and
facilities from the State.
Any act contrary to in clauses (4), (5), (6) and (7) shall be
punishable by law, and a child who is the victim of such act shall have the right
to obtain compensation from the perpetrator, in accordance with law.
Rights of Dalit: (1) The Dalit shall have the right to participate in all bodies of
the State on the basis of the principle of proportional inclusion. Special
provision shall be made by law for the empowerment, representation and
participation of the Dalit community in public services as well as other sectors
of employment.
Provision of free education with scholarship, from primary to
higher education, shall be made by law for the Dalit students. Special provision
shall be made by law for the Dalit in technical and vocational education.
Special provision shall be made by law in order to provide health
and social security to the Dalit community.
The Dalit community shall have the right to use, protect and
develop their traditional occupation, knowledge, skill and technology. The
State shall accord priority to the Dalit community in modern business related
with their traditional occupation and provide skills and resources required
therefor.
The State shall once provide land to the landless Dalit in
accordance with law.
The State shall, in accordance with law, arrange settlement for
the Dalit who do not have housing.
The facilities conferred by this Article to the Dalit community
must be distributed in a just manner so that the Dalit women, men and Dalit in
all communities can obtain such facilities proportionately.
Rights of senior citizens: The senior citizens shall have the right to special
protection and social security from the State.
Right to social justice: (1) The socially backward women, Dalit, indigenous
people, indigenous nationalities, Madhesi, Tharu, minorities, persons with
disabilities, marginalized communities, Muslims, backward classes, gender and
sexual minorities, youths, farmers, labourers, oppressed or citizens of
backward regions and indigent Khas Arya shall have the right to participate in
the State bodies on the basis of inclusive principle.
The indigent citizens and citizens of the communities on the
verge of extinction shall have the right to get special opportunities and benefits
in education, health, housing, employment, food and social security for their
protection, upliftment, empowerment and development.
The citizens with disabilities shall have the right to live with
dignity and honour, with the identity of their diversity, and have equal access to
public services and facilities.
Every farmer shall have the right to have access to lands for agro
activities, select and protect local seeds and agro species which have been used
and pursued traditionally, in accordance with law.
The families of the martyrs who have sacrificed their life,
persons who were forced to disappear, and those who became disabled and
injured in all popular movements, armed conflicts and revolutions that have
been carried out for progressive democratic changes in Nepal, democracy
fighters, conflict victims and displaced ones, persons with disabilities, the
injured and victims shall have the right to get a prioritized opportunity, with
justice and due respect, in education, health, employment, housing and social
security, in accordance with law.
Right to social security: The indigent citizens, incapacitated and helpless
citizens, helpless single women, citizens with disabilities, children, citizens
who cannot take care themselves and citizens belonging to the tribes on the
verge of extinction shall have the right to social security, in accordance with
Rights of the consumer: (1) Every consumer shall have the right to obtain
quality goods and services.
A person who has suffered injury from any substandard goods or
services shall have the right to obtain compensation in accordance with law.
Right against exile: No citizen shall be exiled.
Right to constitutional remedies: There shall be a right to obtain constitutional
remedies in the manner set forth in Article 133 or 144 for the enforcement of
the rights conferred by this Part.
Implementation of fundamental rights: The State shall, as required, make legal
provisions for the implementation of the rights conferred by this Part, within
three years of the commencement of this Constitution.
Duties of citizens: Every citizen shall have the following duties:
(a) to safeguard the nationality, sovereignty and integrity of Nepal,
while being loyal to the nation,
(b) to abide by the Constitution and law,
(c) to render compulsory service as and when the State so requires,
(d) to protect and preserve public property.

Part-4
Directive Principles, Policies and Obligations of the State
To be guiding principles: (1) The directive principles, policies and obligations
set forth in this Part shall be the guiding principles for the governance of the
State.
The State shall mobilize, or cause to be mobilized, means and
resources, as required, to implement the principles, policies and obligations set
forth in this Part.
Directive principles: (1) The political objective of the State shall be to establish
a public welfare system of governance, by establishing a just system in all
aspects of the national life through the rule of law, values and norms of
fundamental rights and human rights, gender equality, proportional inclusion,
participation and social justice, while at the same time protecting the life,
property, equality and liberties of the people, in keeping with the vitality of
freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Nepal, and to
consolidate a federal democratic republican system of governance in order to
ensure an atmosphere conducive to the enjoyment of the fruits of democracy,
while at the same time maintaining the relations between the Federal Units on
the basis of cooperative federalism and incorporating the principle of
proportional participation in the system of governance on the basis of local
autonomy and decentralization.
The social and cultural objective of the State shall be to build a
civilized and egalitarian society by eliminating all forms of discrimination,
exploitation and injustice on the grounds of religion, culture, tradition, usage,
custom, practice or on any other similar grounds, to develop social, cultural
values founded on national pride, democracy, pro-people, respect of labour,
entrepreneurship, discipline, dignity and harmony, and to consolidate the
national unity by maintaining social cohesion, solidarity and harmony, while
recognizing cultural diversity.
The economic objective of the State shall be to achieve a
sustainable economic development, while achieving rapid economic growth, by
way of maximum mobilization of the available means and resources through
participation and development of public, private and cooperatives, and to
develop a socialism-oriented independent and prosperous economy while
making the national economy independent, self-reliant and progressive in order
to build an exploitation free society by abolishing economic inequality through
equitable distribution of the gains.
The State shall direct its international relations towards
enhancing the dignity of the nation in the world community by maintaining
international relations on the basis of sovereign equality, while safeguarding
the freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence and national
interest of Nepal.
Policies of the State: The State shall pursue the following policies:
Policies relating to national unity and national security:
to keep intact the national unity, while protecting the freedom,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Nepal,
to promote the national unity while developing mutual
cooperative relations between the Federal Units by maintaining
mutual cohesion, harmony and solidarity between various castes,
tribes, religions, languages, cultures and communities,
to maintain law and order by developing a national security
system,
to guarantee the overall human security system,
to make all security organs, including the Nepal Army, Nepal
Police and Armed Police Force Nepal, competent, strong,
professional, inclusive and accountable to the people, on the
basis of national security policies,
to make and keep the citizens ready and competent to serve the
nation as and when necessary,
to make proper use, in nations' interest, of the knowledge, skills
and experiences of former public employees including former
employees, military and police.
Policies relating to political and governance system of State:
to guarantee the best interests and prosperity of the people
through economic, social and cultural transformations, while
safeguarding,
consolidating
developing
political
achievements,
to maintain rule of law by protecting and promoting human
rights,
to implement international treaties, agreements to which Nepal is
a party,
to guarantee good governance by ensuring the equal and easy
access of the people to the services and facilities delivered by the
State, while making public administration fair, competent,
impartial, transparent, free from corruption, accountable and
participatory,
to make necessary provisions to make mass media fair, healthy,
impartial, decent, responsible and professional,
to develop and expand harmonious and cooperative relations
between the Federal Units by way of sharing of responsibilities,
resources and administration between them.
Relating to social and cultural transformation:
to build the society founded on cordial social relations by
developing a healthy and civilized culture,
to carrying out studies, research works, excavation and
dissemination for the protection, promotion and development of
ancient, archaeological and cultural heritages,
to make community development through enhancement of local
public participation, by promoting and mobilizing the creativity
of local communities in social, cultural and service-oriented
works,
to focus on the development of arts, literature and music which
form cultural heritages,
to end all forms of discrimination, inequality, exploitation and
injustice in the name of religion, custom, usage, practice and
tradition existing in the society,
to protect and develop languages, scripts, culture, literature, arts,
motion pictures and heritages of various castes, tribes, and
communities on the basis of equality and co-existence, while
maintaining the cultural diversity of the country,
to pursue a multi-lingual policy.
Relating to economy, industry and commerce:
enhance
national
economy
through
partnership
independent development of the public, private and cooperative
sectors,
to achieve economic prosperity by way of optimum mobilization
of the available means and resources, while focusing on the role
of private sector in economy,
to promote the cooperative sector and mobilize it in national
development to the maximum extent,
to encourage and mobilize the economic sector in the overall
national development, while providing for regulation to maintain
fairness, accountability and competition in all of its activities,
to make equitable distribution of the available means and
resources and benefits of economic development,
to diversify and expand markets for goods and services, while
promoting exports through development and expansion of
industries upon identifying areas of comparative advantage,
to protect the interests of consumers by maintaining trade
fairness and discipline by making national economy competitive,
while ending activities such as creating black marketing,
monopoly, artificial scarcity and restricting competition,
to protect and promote domestic industries and resources and
accord priority to domestic investment based on Nepalese labour,
skills and raw materials for the development of national
economy,
to give priority to domestic investment for the development of
national economy,
to encourage foreign capital and technological investment in
areas of import substitution and export promotion, in consonance
with national interest, and encourage and mobilize such
investment in infrastructure building,
to make the obtaining of foreign assistance transparent, while
making the national needs and priorities as the basis for obtaining
foreign assistance, and incorporating amounts received in form of
foreign assistance in the national budget,
to utilize knowledge, skill, technology and capital of the nonresident Nepalese in the national development,
to give dynamism to the economic development by establishing
coordination between the States and the States and the Federation
in relation to industrial corridors, special economic zones,
national projects and projects involving foreign investment.
Policies relating to agriculture and land reforms:
to make scientific land reforms having regard to the interests of
the farmers, while ending the dual ownership existing in the
lands,
to enhance product and productivity by carrying out land
pooling, while discouraging inactive land ownership,
management
commercialization,
industrialization,
diversification
modernization
agriculture, by pursuing land-use policies to enhance agriculture
product and productivity, while protecting and promoting the
rights and interests of the farmers,
to make proper use of lands, while regulating and managing
lands on the basis of, inter alia, productivity, nature of lands and
ecological balance,
to provide for the farmers' access to agricultural inputs, agroproducts at fair price and market.
Policies relating to development:
to formulate sustainable socio-economic development strategies
and programs under the regional development plan for inclusive
economic development with regional balance, and implement
them in a coordinative manner,
to develop balanced, environment friendly, quality and
sustainable physical infrastructures, while according priority to
the regions lagging behind from development perspective,
to enhance local public participation in the process of
development works,
to enhance investment in scientific study, research works and in
invention, progress and development of science and technology,
and protect scientists, technologists, intellectual and eminent
talents,
to ensure easy and simple access of the general public to
information
technology
developing
expanding
information technology to the tune of national needs, and make
optimum utilization of information technology in the national
development,
to make provisions enabling the general public to enjoy fruits of
development in a just manner, while according priority to the
indigent citizens in the distribution of such fruits,
to develop an integrated national identity management
information system and manage all kinds of information and data
of the citizens in an integrated manner, and linking such system
with the services and facilities provided by the State and with
national development plans,
to update demographic statistics and linking it with national
development plans.
Policies relating to protection, promotion and use of natural resources:
to protect, promote, and make environmental friendly and
sustainable use of, natural resources available in the country, in
consonance with national interest and adopting the concept of
inter-generational equity, and make equitable distribution of
fruits, according priority and preferential right to the local
communities,
to make multi-purpose development of water resources, while
according priority to domestic investment based on public
participation,
to ensure reliable supply of energy in an affordable and easy
manner, and make proper use of energy, for the fulfilment of the
basic needs of citizens, by generating and developing renewable
energy,
to develop sustainable and reliable irrigation by making control
of water-induced disasters, and river management,
to conserve, promote, and make sustainable use of, forests,
wildlife, birds, vegetation and bio-diversity, by mitigating
possible risks to environment from industrial and physical
development, while raising awareness of general public about
environment cleanliness,
to maintain the forest area in necessary lands for ecological
balance,
to adopt appropriate measures to abolish or mitigate existing or
possible adverse environmental impacts on the nature,
environment or biological diversity,
to pursue the principles of environmentally sustainable
development such as the principles of polluter pays, of
precaution in environmental protection and of prior informed
consent.
to make advance warning, preparedness, rescue, relief and
rehabilitation in order to mitigate risks from natural disasters.
Policies relating to basic needs of the citizens:
to prepare human resources that are competent, competitive,
ethical, and devoted to national interests, while making education
scientific, technical, vocational, empirical, employment and
people-oriented,
to make private sector investment made in education serviceoriented by regulating and managing such investment, while
enhancing the State's investment in the education sector,
to make higher education easy, qualitative and accessible, and
free gradually,
to establish and promote community information centres and
libraries for the personality development of citizens,
to keep on enhancing investment necessary in the public health
sector by the State in order to make the citizens healthy,
to ensure easy, convenient and equal access of all to quality
health services,
to protect and promote health systems including Ayurveda, as a
traditional medical system of Nepal, natural therapy and
homeopathy system,
to make private sector investment in the health sector serviceoriented by regulating and managing such investment, while
enhancing the State's investment in this sector,
to focus on health research and keep on increasing the number of
health institutions and health workers in order to make health
services widely available and qualitative,
to increase average life expectancy by reducing maternal and
infant mortality rate, while encouraging family planning for
population management on the basis of Nepal's capacity and
need,
to manage unplanned settlement and develop planned and
systematic settlement,
to provide for sustainable production, supplies, storage, security,
and easy and effective distribution of foods by encouraging food
production in tune with climate and soil, in consonance with the
concept of food sovereignty, while enhancing investment in the
agriculture sector,
to ensure planned supply system by according special priority to
the remote and backward regions, while ensuring equal access of
all citizens to basic goods and services,
to enhance investment in the transportation sector, while ensuring
simple, easy and equal access of the citizens to transportation
facilities, and to make the transportation sector safe, systematic
and persons with disabilities friendly by encouraging public
transportation and regulating private transportation, while
according priority to the environment friendly technologies,
to arrange for access to medical treatment while ensuring
citizen's health insurance.
Policies relating to labour and employment:
to make competent and professional the labour force that has
remained as the main socio-economic strength of the country and
enhance employment within the country, while ensuring a
situation enabling all to work,
to guarantee social security, while ensuring the basic rights of all
labours, in consonance with the concept of decent labour,
to abolish all forms of labour exploitation including child labour,
to encourage participation of labours in management, while
maintain cordial relations between the labours and entrepreneurs,
to regulate and manage the sector in order to make foreign
employment free from exploitation, safe and systematic and to
guarantee employment and rights of the labours,
to encourage to mobilize the capital, skills, technology and
experience gained from foreign employment in productive
sectors in the country.
Policies relating to social justice and inclusion:
to keep on making appropriate arrangements for the livelihoods
of the helpless single women, while according priority to them in
employment on the basis of skills, competency and qualification,
to make self-dependent the women who are vulnerable, subjected
to social and family exclusion and victims of violence self-reliant
by making their rehabilitation, protection and empowerment,
to ensure enjoyment of requisite services and facilities at the
reproductive stage,
to evaluate economically the work and contribution such as
maintenance of children and care of families,
to take into consideration primarily of the best interests of the
child,
to identify the freed bonded labours, Kamlari, Harawa,
Charawa, tillers, landless, squatters and rehabilitate them by
providing housing, housing plot for residence and cultivable land
or employment for their livelihoods,
to create an atmosphere conducive to the full enjoyment of the
political, economic, social and cultural rights, while enhancing
the participation of youths in national development, to make their
personality development, while providing special opportunity in
areas including education, health and employment for the
empowerment and development of the youths and provide them
with appropriate opportunities for the overall development of the
State,
to make the indigenous nationalities participate in decisions
concerning that community by making special provisions for
opportunities and benefits in order to ensure the right of these
nationalities to live with dignity, along with their identity, and
protect and promote traditional knowledge, skill, culture, social
tradition and experience of the indigenous nationalities and local
communities,
to make special provisions for opportunities and benefits to
minority communities to enjoy social and cultural rights, with
maintaining their identity,
to make special provisions for equal distribution of economic,
social and cultural opportunities and benefits to the Madhesi
community, Muslims and backward class, and for opportunities
and benefits to the indigent citizens within such communities for
their protection, upliftment, empowerment and development,
to make special provisions for opportunities and benefits for the
protection, upliftment, empowerment and development of the
citizens of the oppressed and backward regions and for the
fulfilment of their basic needs,
to accord priority to the indigent within all sexes, regions and
communities in the provision of social security and social justice,
to make planned investment in sports and sport-persons in order
to prepare healthy, competent and disciplined citizens, and to
develop sports as a means of consolidating national unity and
enhancing national prestige at the international level,
to adopt a single door system for the establishment, approval,
operation, regulation and management of community-based and
national or international non-governmental organizations and to
involve such organizations only in the sectors of national need
and priority, while making investment and role of such
organizations transparent and accountable.
Policies relating to justice and penal system:
to make the administration of justice speedy, efficient, widely
available, economical, impartial, effective, and accountable to
people,
to pursue alternative means such as mediation and arbitration for
the settlement of disputes of general nature,
to adopt effective measures for the control of corruption and
irregularities in all sectors including political, administrative,
judicial and social sectors.
Policies relating to tourism: To develop eco-friendly tourism industries
as an important base of national economy by way of identification,
protection, promotion and publicity of the ancient, cultural, religious,
archaeological and natural heritages of Nepal, to make environment and
policy required for the development of tourism culture, and to accord
priority to local people in the distribution of benefits of tourism
industries.
Policies relating to international relations:
to conduct an independent foreign policy based on the Charter of
the United Nations, non-alignment, principles of Panchsheel,
international law and the norms of world peace, taking into
consideration of the overall interest of the nation, while
remaining active in safeguarding the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, independence and national interest of Nepal,
to review treaties concluded in the past, and make treaties,
agreements based on equality and mutual interest.
Obligations of the State: It shall be the obligation of the State to make Nepal a
prosperous and affluent country by protecting and promoting fundamental
rights and human rights, pursuing directive principles of the State and
gradually implementing policies of the State, while keeping intact the freedom,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Nepal.
To submit report: The Government of Nepal shall submit an annual report
containing the steps taken and achievements made in the implementation of the
directive principles, policies and obligations of the State set forth in this Part to
the President, and the President shall cause such report to be laid through the
Prime Minister before the Federal Parliament.
Provisions relating to monitoring: There shall be a committee, in accordance
with law, in the Federal Parliament in order to monitor and evaluate whether
the directive principles, policies and obligations of the State set forth in this
Part have been implemented progressively or not.
Questions not to be raised in court: No question shall be raised in any court as
to whether any matter contained in this Part has been implemented or not.

Part-5
Structure of State and Distribution of State Power
Structure of State: (1) The main structure of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Nepal shall be of three levels, namely the Federation, the State and the Local
level.
The Federation, State and Local levels shall exercise the power
of State of Nepal pursuant to this Constitution and law.
There shall be States consisting of the Districts as mentioned in
Schedule-4 existing in Nepal at the time of commencement of this
Constitution.
There shall be Village Institutions, Municipalities and District
Assemblies under the Local level. The number of Wards in a Village
Institution and Municipality shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Any Special, Protected or Autonomous Region can be set by the
Federal law for social, cultural protection or economic development.
The Federation, State and Local levels shall protect Nepal's
freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence, national interest,
overall development, multi-party, competitive, democratic, republican, federal
system of governance, human rights and fundamental rights, rule of law,
separation of powers and check and balance, egalitarian society based on
pluralism and equality, inclusive representation and identity.
Distribution of State power: (1) The powers of the Federation shall be vested in
the matters enumerated in Schedule-5, and such powers shall be exercised
pursuant to this Constitution and the Federal law.
The powers of a State shall be vested in the matters enumerated
in Schedule-6, and such powers shall be exercised pursuant to this Constitution
and the State law.
The concurrent powers of the Federation and the State shall be
vested in the matters enumerated in Schedule-7, and such powers shall be
exercised pursuant to this Constitution, the Federal law and the State law.
The powers of the Local level shall be vested in the matters
enumerated in Schedule-8, and such powers shall be exercised pursuant to this
Constitution and the law made by the Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly.
The concurrent powers of the Federation, State and Local levels
shall be vested in the matters enumerated in Schedule-9, and such powers shall
be exercised pursuant to this Constitution, the Federal law, the State law and
the law made by the Village Assembly or Municipal Assembly.
Any law to be made by the State Assembly, Village Assembly or
Municipal Assembly pursuant to clause (3) or (5) shall be so made as not to be
inconsistent with the Federal law, and any law made by the State Assembly,
Village Assembly or Municipal Assembly which is inconsistent with the
Federal law shall be invalid to the extent of such inconsistency.
Any law to be made by the Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly pursuant to clause (5) shall be so made as not to be inconsistent with
the State law, and any law made by the Village Assembly or Municipal
Assembly which is inconsistent with the State law shall be invalid to the extent
of such inconsistency.
Residual powers: The Federation shall have power on any matter not
enumerated in the Federal List, State List, List of Local level or Concurrent
List or on any matter which is not so specified in this Constitution as to be
exercised by any level.
Exercise of financial powers: (1) The Federation, State and Local level shall
make laws, make annual budget, decisions, formulate and implement policies
and plans on any matters related to financial powers within their respective
jurisdictions.
The Federation may so make necessary policies, standards and
laws on any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and other areas
of financial powers as to be applicable also to the States.
The Federation, State and Local level shall make budget of their
respective levels, and the time for submission of budget by the State and Local
level shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
The Federation, State and Local level shall provide for the
equitable distribution of benefits derived from the use of natural resources or
development. Certain portions of such benefits shall be distributed, pursuant to
law, in forms of royalty, services or goods to the project affected regions and
local communities.
If, in utilising natural resources, the local community desires to
make investment therein, the Federation, State and Local level shall accord
priority to such investment in such portion as provided by law on the basis of
the nature and size of such investment.
The Government of Nepal shall have power to obtain foreign
assistance and borrow loans. Such assistance or loans shall be so obtained or
borrowed as to have macro-economic stability of the country.
Provisions relating to the management of budget deficits and
other fiscal discipline of the Federation, State and Local level shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
Distribution of sources of revenue: (1) The Federation, State and Local level
may impose taxes on matters falling within their respective jurisdiction and
collect revenue from these sources.
Provided that provisions relating to the imposition of taxes and
collection of revenue on matters that fall within the Concurrent List and on
matters that are not included in the List of any level shall be as determined by
the Government of Nepal.
The Government of Nepal shall make provisions for the equitable
distribution of the collected revenue to the Federation, State and Local level.
The amount of fiscal transfer receivable by the State and Local
level shall be as recommended by the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission.
The Government of Nepal shall, on the basis of the need of
expenditure and revenue capacity, distribute fiscal equalization grants to the
State and Local level.
Each State shall, in accordance with the State law, distribute
fiscal equalization grants out of the grants received from the Government of
Nepal and revenues collected from its sources, on the basis of the need of
expenditure and revenue capacity of its subordinate Local level.
Provisions relating to distribution of conditional grants,
complementary grants or special grants for other purposes to be provided by
the Government of Nepal from the Federal Consolidated Fund shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
Distribution of revenues between the Federal, State and Local
level shall be made in a balanced and transparent manner.
A Federal Act on the distribution of revenues shall be made
having regard to the national policies, national requirements, autonomy of the
State and Local levels, services to be rendered by the State and the Local level
to the people and financial powers granted to them, capacity to collect
revenues, potentiality and use of revenues, assistance to be made in
development works, reduction of regional imbalances, poverty and inequality,
end of deprivation, and assistance to be made in the performance of contingent
works and fulfilment of temporary needs.

Part-6
President and Vice-President
President: (1) There shall be a President of Nepal.
The President shall be the head of state of Nepal. He or she shall
perform his or her functions in accordance with this Constitution and the
Federal law.
The President shall promote the national unity of Nepal.
The main duty of the President shall be to abide by and protect
this Constitution.
Election of President: (1) The President shall be elected by an electoral college
composed of the members of the Federal Parliament and of the State
Assemblies. The voting weightage of the members of the Federal Parliament
and of the State Assemblies shall vary as provided for in the Federal law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), nothing shall
be deemed to bar the formation of an electoral college for the purpose of
election to the President by the sole reason that election to the State Assembly
has not been held in any State.
A person who secures a majority of the then existing total votes
of the electoral college under clause (1) shall be elected as the President.
If none of the candidates secures a majority under clause (3),
there shall be voting between the two candidates who have secured the highest
number of votes, and a candidate who secures more than fifty percent of the
total votes in such a voting shall be elected as the President.
If none of the candidates secures more than fifty percent of the
total votes even in the voting under clause (4), re-voting shall be held. A
candidate who secures a majority of the total valid votes cast in such voting
shall be elected as the President.
If a person who holds a political office to be filled by way of
election, nomination or appointment is appointed as the President under this
Article, his or her such office shall ipso facto be vacant.
Election to the President and other matters related thereto shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
Term of office of President: (1) The term of office of the President shall be five
years from the date on which he or she is so elected.
The President whose term of office under clause (1) has expired
shall continue to discharge the functions under this Constitution until another
elected President assumes his or her office.
Qualification for President: (1) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to become the President:
being qualified to become a member of the Federal Parliament,
having completed the age of at least forty five years, and
not being disqualified by any law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who
has already been elected twice as the President shall not become a candidate in
the election to the President.
Vacation of office of President: The office of the President shall become vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Vice-President,
if a motion of impeachment against him or her is passed under

Article 101,
if his or her term of office expires,
If he or she dies.
Functions, duties and powers of President: (1) The President shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as conferred to him or her pursuant to
this Constitution or a Federal law.
In exercising the powers or duties under clause (1), the President
shall perform all other functions to be performed by him or her on
recommendation and with the consent of the Council of Ministers than those
functions specifically provided to be performed on recommendation of any
body or official under this Constitution or Federal Law. Such recommendation
and consent shall be submitted through the Prime Minister.
Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the President
under clause (2) and other instrument of authorization pertaining thereto shall
be authenticated as provided for in the Federal law.
Vice-President: (1) There shall be a Vice-president of Nepal.
The functions to be performed by the President shall be
performed by the Vice-president during the absence of the President.
If a person who holds a political office to be filled by way of
election, nomination or appointment is appointed as the Vice-president, his or
her such office shall ipso facto be vacant.
Vacation of office of Vice-president: The office of the Vice-president shall
become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if a motion of impeachment against him or her is passed under

Article 101,
if his or her term of office expires,
if he or she dies.
Other provisions relating to Vice-President: Provisions relating to the
qualification, procedures of election and term of office of the Vice-President
shall be the same as that of the President.
President and Vice-President to be from different sex or community: Election
to the President and the Vice-president under this Constitution shall be so made
as to have representation of different sex or community.
Oath by President and Vice-President: Prior to assuming their respective
offices, the President shall take an oath of office and secrecy before the Chief
Justice, and the Vice-President, before the President, as provided for in the
Federal law.
Remuneration and facilities of President and Vice-President: The remuneration
and other facilities of the President and the Vice-president shall be as provided
for in the Federal Act, and as specified by the Government of Nepal until such
Act is made.
Office of President and Vice-President: (1) There shall be separate offices for
the performance of the functions of the President and the Vice-President.
The Government of Nepal shall make arrangements for
employees and other provisions as required to perform the functions of the
offices under clause (1).

Part-7
Federal Executive
Form of government: The form of government of Nepal shall be multi-party,
competitive,
federal,
democratic,
republican,
parliamentary
government based on pluralism.
Executive power: (1) The executive power of Nepal shall, pursuant to this
Constitution and law, be vested in the Council of Ministers.
The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and
regulating the governance of Nepal shall, subject to this Constitution and law,
lie in the Council of Ministers.
All Federal executive functions of Nepal shall be performed in
the name of the Government of Nepal.
Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the
Government of Nepal pursuant to clause (3) and other instruments of
authorization pertaining thereto shall be authenticated as provided for in the
Federal law.
Constitution of Council of Ministers: (1) The President shall appoint the leader
of a parliamentary party that commands majority in the House of
Representatives as the Prime Minister, and the Council of Ministers shall be
constituted under his or her chairpersonship.
In cases where no party has a clear majority in the House of
Representatives under clause (1), the President shall appoint as the Prime
Minister a member of the House of Representatives who can command
majority with the support of two or more parties representing to the House of
Representatives.
In cases where Prime Minister cannot be appointed under clause
(2) no later than thirty days after the date of declaration of the final results of
election to the House of Representatives or the Prime Minister so appointed
fails to secure a vote of confidence under clause (4), the President shall appoint
as the Prime Minister the parliamentary party leader of the party which has the
highest number of members in the House of Representatives.
The Prime Minister appointed under clause (2) or (3) shall obtain
a vote of confidence from the House of Representatives no later than thirty
days after the date of such appointment.
In cases where the Prime Minister appointed under clause (3)
fails to obtain a vote of confidence under clause (4) and any member under
clause (2) presents a ground on which he or she can obtain a vote of confidence
in the House of Representatives, the President shall appoint such member as
the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister appointed under clause (5) must obtain a
vote of confidence under clause (4).
In cases where the Prime Minister appointed under clause (5)
fails to obtain a vote of confidence or the Prime Minister cannot be appointed,
the President shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister, dissolve the
House of Representatives and appoint a date of election so that the election to
another House of Representatives is completed within six months.
Procedures on the appointment of the Prime Minister under this
Article must be completed no later than thirty five days after the date of
declaration of the final results of election to the House of Representatives held
under this Constitution or the date on which the office of the Prime Minister
has fallen vacant.
The President shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister,
constitute the Council of Ministers comprising a maximum of twenty five
Ministers including the Prime Minister, in accordance with the inclusive
principle, from amongst the members of the Federal Parliament.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Minister" means a Deputy
Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister.
The Prime Minister and Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to the Federal Parliament, and the Ministers shall be individually
responsible for the work of their respective Ministries to the Prime Minister
and the Federal Parliament.
Vacation of office of Prime Minister and Minister: (1) The office of the Prime
Minister shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if a vote of confidence is not passed or a vote of no-confidence is
passed against him or her under Article 100,
if he or she ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives,
if he or she dies.
The office of a Minister shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Prime Minister,
if the Prime Minister removes him or her from office,
if the office of Prime Minister falls vacant under sub-clause (a),
(b) or (c) of clause (1),
if he or she dies.
If the office of Prime Minister falls vacant under clause (1), the
same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another Council of
Ministers is constituted.
Provided that if the Prime Minister dies, the senior-most Minister shall
act as the Prime Minister until a new Prime Minister is appointed.
Non-member of Federal Parliament to be Minister: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in clause (9) of Article 76, the President may, on
recommendation of the Prime Minister, appoint a person who is not a member
of the Federal Parliament as a Minister
A Minister appointed under clause (1) must obtain membership
of the Federal Parliament within six months from the date of taking oath by
him or her.
In the event of failure to obtain membership of the Federal
Parliament within the period mentioned in clause (2), he or she shall not be
qualified to be reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of the then
House of Representatives.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who
has been defeated in the election to the then House of Representatives shall not
be qualified to be appointed to the office of Minister during the term of such
House of Representatives.
Remuneration and other facilities of Prime Minister and Ministers: The
remuneration and other facilities of the Prime Minister and Ministers shall be
as provided for in the Federal Act, and shall be as specified by the Government
of Nepal until such Act is made.
Oath: The Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and Ministers shall take an
oath of office and secrecy before the President, and Ministers of State and
Assistant Ministers, before the Prime Minister, as provided for in the Federal
law, prior to assuming their respective offices.
To inform President: The Prime Minister shall inform the President about the
following matters:
resolutions of the Council of Ministers,
Bills to be introduced in the Federal Parliament,
such other necessary information as commanded by the President
on matters set forth in clauses (a) and (b), and
current general state of affairs of the country and matters
concerning foreign relations.
Transaction of business of Government of Nepal: (1) The business of the
Government of Nepal shall be allocated and transacted in accordance with the
rules approved by the Government of Nepal.
No question may be raised in any court as to whether or not the
rules under clause (1) have been observed.

Part-8
Federal Legislature
Federal Legislature: There shall be a Federal Legislature consisting of two
Houses to be known as the House of Representatives and the National
Assembly, which shall be called as the Federal Parliament.
Composition of House of Representatives: (1) The House of Representatives
shall consist of a total of two hundred and seventy five members, as follows:
One hundred and sixty five members to be elected through the
first past the post electoral system, with one being elected from
each election constituency of one hundred and sixty five election
constituencies delimited in the country on the basis of geography
and population,
One hundred and ten members to be elected through the
proportional electoral system where voters vote for political
parties, with the whole country being considered as a single
election constituency.
The Federal law shall provide that, in fielding candidacy by
political parties for the election to the House of Representatives under the
proportional electoral system, representation shall be ensured on the basis of a
closed list also from women, Dalit, indigenous peoples, Khas Arya, Madhesi,
Tharu, Muslims and backward regions, on the basis of population. In so
fielding candidacy, regard shall also be had to geography and territorial
balance.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "Khas Arya" means Kshetri,
Brahmin, Thakuri, Sanyasi (Dashnami) community.
In fielding candidacy under clause (2), political parties shall
provide for representation of the persons with disabilities as well.
Election to the House of Representatives under clause (1) shall
be held through secret ballots in accordance with law.
Each citizen of Nepal who has completed the age of eighteen
years shall have the right to vote in any one election constituency as provided
for in the Federal law.
A person who is qualified under Article 87 and entitled to vote in
an election to the members of the House of Representatives may, subject to the
Federal law, be a candidate in any election constituency.
Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in more than one election
constituencies at the same time.
If the seat of any member of the House of Representatives falls
vacant while its term still remains for more than six months, the vacancy shall
be filled in the same manner of electoral system as in which such seat was
filled in.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, at
least one third of the total number of members elected from each political party
representing in the Federal Parliament must be women. If women are not so
elected as to constitute one third of the elected members of any political party
under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) and sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 86,
such political party must, in electing members under sub-clause (b) of clause
(1), so elect that women members constitute at least one third of the total
number of members elected to the Federal Parliament from that party.
Election to the House of Representatives and other matters
pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Term of House of Representatives: (1) Unless dissolved earlier pursuant to this
Constitution, the term of the House of Representatives shall be five years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the term of the
House of Representatives may be extended by a Federal Act for a period not
exceeding one year in cases where a proclamation or order of a state of
emergency is in effect.
The term of the House of Representatives extended under clause
(2) shall ipso facto expire upon the expiry of six months from the date of
voidance of the proclamation or order of the state of emergency.
Composition of National Assembly and term of office of its members: (1) The
National Assembly shall be a permanent House.
The National Assembly shall consist of fifty nine members as
follows:
fifty six elected members consisting of at least three women, one
Dalit and one from persons with disabilities or minorities, from
each State by an electoral college composed of members of the
State Assembly, chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of the
Village Bodies, and Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the
Municipalities, with different weightage of vote by members of
the State Assembly, chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of the
Village Bodies, and Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the
Municipalities, as provided for in the Federal law,
Three members consisting of at least one woman nominated by
the President on recommendation of the Government of Nepal.
The term of office of the members of the National Assembly
shall be six years. The term of office of one third of the members of the
National Assembly shall expire in every two years.
Provided that, for the first time, after the commencement of this
Constitution, arrangements shall be made by drawing lots to retire one-third of
the members on the expiry of two years, another one-third on the expiry of four
years, and the final one-third on the expiry of six years.
In computing the term of office of the members of the National
Assembly for the first time after the commencement of this Constitution, the
term of office of all members shall be deemed to have commenced on the day
on which the first session of the National Assembly is held.
Any vacancy of seat in the National Assembly shall be filled for
the remainder of the term of office in the same manner of election or
nomination as in which the seat of the vacating member was filled.
Other matters relating to election to the members of the National
Assembly shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Qualification for member: (1) A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to become a member of the Federal Parliament:
being a citizen of Nepal,
having completed the age of twenty five years, for the House of
Representatives, and the age of thirty five years, for the National
Assembly,
not having been convicted of a criminal offense involving moral
turpitude,
not being disqualified by any Federal law, and
not holding any office of profit.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "office of profit" means any
position, other than a political position which is to be filled by election or
nomination, for which a remuneration or economic benefit is paid out of a
government fund.
No person may be a member of both Houses at the same time.
If a person who holds a political office to be filled by way of
election, nomination or appointment is elected or nominated as a member of
the Federal Parliament under this Part, his or her such office shall ipso facto be
vacant from the day on which he or she takes an oath of office of member of
the Federal Parliament.
Oath: Every member of each House of the Federal Parliament must, before
taking part for the first time in the session of the House or any of its
committees, take an oath as provided for in the Federal law.
Vacation of seat: The seat of a member of the Federal Parliament shall become
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing before the Speaker or
Chairperson,
if he or she is no longer qualified or ceases to possess the
qualification under Article 87,
if the term of the House of Representatives or the term of office
of the member of the National Assembly expires,
if he or she absents himself or herself from ten consecutive
meetings, without giving notice to the concerned House,
if the political party of which he or she was a member when
elected provides a notification in accordance with the Federal law
that he or she has defected from the party,
if he or she dies.
Decision as to disqualification of member: If a question arises as to whether
any member of the Federal Parliament is disqualified or has become
disqualified under Article 87, the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court
shall finally decide that question.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of House of Representatives: (1) The members of
the House of Representatives shall, not later than fifteen days of the date of
holding of the first meeting of the House of Representatives, elect a Speaker
and a Deputy Speaker from amongst themselves.
Election under clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman
out of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, and the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the House of Representatives shall be representatives from different
parties.
Provided that if there is no representation of more than one party in the
House of Representatives or no candidacy is filed by more than one party in
spite of representation, nothing shall prevent the members of the same party
from being the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives.
If the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker falls vacant,
the members of the House of Representatives shall fill the vacancy by electing
the Speaker or Deputy Speaker from amongst themselves.
The Deputy Speaker shall, in the absence of the Speaker, chair
the House of Representatives.
If election to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker is not held or if
both the positions become vacant, the attending member who is by age the
senior-most shall chair the meeting of the House of Representatives.
The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives,
Provided that, in the event of dissolution of the House of
Representatives, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the
House of Representatives holding their respective offices shall
continue in office until the previous day of the filing of
nominations for another election to the House of Representatives,
if he or she tenders resignation in writing,
if a resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total
number of the then members of the House of Representatives that
his or her conduct is not compatible with his or her office.
The Deputy Speaker shall chair a meeting at which deliberations
are to be held on a resolution that the conduct of the Speaker of the House of
Representatives is not compatible with his or her office. The Speaker of the
House of Representatives may take part and vote in the deliberations on such
resolution.
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of National Assembly: (1) The members of
the National Assembly shall, not later than fifteen days of the date of holding
of its first meeting, elect the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly from amongst themselves.
Election under clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman
out of the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly.
If the office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly falls vacant, the members of the National Assembly shall
fill the vacancy by electing its Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson from amongst
themselves.
The Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly shall, in the
absence of its Chairperson, chair the National Assembly.
If the election to the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly is not held or if both the positions becomes vacant, the
member who is by age the senior-most out of the attending members shall
chair the meeting of the National Assembly.
The office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly shall become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she ceases to be a member of the National Assembly,
if he or she tenders resignation in writing,
if a resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total
number of the then members of the National Assembly that his or
her conduct is not compatible with his or her office.
The Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly shall chair a
meeting at which deliberations are to be held on a resolution that the conduct
of the Chairperson of the National Assembly is not compatible with his or her
office. The Chairperson of the National Assembly may take part and vote in
the deliberations on such resolution.
Summoning and prorogation of session: (1) The President shall summon a
session of the Federal Parliament within thirty days of the declaration of final
results of the election to the House of Representatives. Thereafter, the
President shall, from time to time, summon sessions of both or either of the
Houses pursuant to this Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two consecutive sessions shall
not exceed six months.
The President may prorogue the sessions of both or either of the
Houses of the Federal Parliament.
If, during the prorogation or recess of the session of the House of
Representatives, one-fourth of the total number of its members write a petition
that it is desirable to convene a session or meeting, the President shall specify
the date and time for such session or meeting. The House of Representatives
shall meet or commence its session at the date and time so specified.
Quorum: Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, no question or
resolution shall be presented for decision in a meeting of either House of the
Federal Parliament unless one-fourth of the total number of its members are
present.
Address by President: (1) The President may address either a meeting of any
House or a joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, and summon
the members for that purpose.
The President shall address the first session after election to the
House of Representatives and a joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament after the commencement of the first session of each year.
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister
entitled to take part in both Houses: The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister,
Minister of State and Assistant Minister shall be entitled to attend and take part
in the proceedings and deliberations of either House of the Federal Parliament
or its committees.
Provided that he or she shall not be entitled to vote in a House or its
committee of which he or she is not a member.
Formation of committees: (1) The House of Representatives and the National
Assembly may form committees as provided for in the Federal law.
If a resolution is passed by either House demanding that a joint
committee of both the Houses be formed for the purpose of managing the
working procedures between the two Houses of the Federal Parliament,
resolving disagreement on any Bill or for any other specified function, the joint
committee shall be formed. The joint committee shall consist of a maximum of
twenty five members in the ratio of five members from the House of
Representatives to one member from the National Assembly.
Transaction of business in case of vacancy in seat of member: Either House of
the Federal Parliament shall have the power to transact its business
notwithstanding any vacancy in the seat of its member. No proceedings of
either House of the Federal Parliament shall become invalid even if it is
subsequently discovered that a person who was not so entitled took part in such
proceedings.
Voting: Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, any motions
submitted for decision in either House of the Federal Parliament shall be
decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting. The member
chairing the meeting shall not have the right to vote.
Provided that he or she may cast vote in the case of a tie.
100. Provisions relating to vote of confidence and motion of no-confidence: (1) The
Prime Minister may, whenever he or she considers necessary or appropriate to
show that he or she has confidence from the House of Representatives, table a
motion to that effect in the House of Representatives for the vote of
confidence.
If the political party which the Prime Minister represents is
divided or a political party in coalition government withdraws its support, the
Prime Minister shall table a motion in the House of Representatives for a vote
of confidence within thirty days.
If a motion tabled under clauses (1) and (2) is not passed by a
majority of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives, the Prime Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
One-fourth of the total number of the then members of the House
of Representatives may table a motion of no-confidence in writing that the
House has no confidence in the Prime Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not be tabled until the first
two years after the appointment of the Prime Minister and until another one
year after the date of failure of the motion of no confidence once tabled.
A motion of no confidence to be tabled under clause (4) shall
also indicate the name of a member proposed for the Prime Minister.
If a motion of no confidence tabled under clause (4) is passed by
a majority of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives, the Prime Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
If the office of Prime Minister falls vacant because of the passage
of a motion of no confidence under clause (6), the President shall, in
accordance with Article 76, appoint as the Prime Minister the member of the
House of Representatives proposed under clause (5).
101. Impeachment: (1) One fourth of the total number of the then members of the
House of Representatives may move a motion of impeachment against the
President or Vice-President on the ground of serious violation of this
Constitution and the Federal law. If the motion is passed by at least two thirds
majority of the total number of the then members of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, he or she shall relive of his or her office.
One fourth of the total number of the then members of the House
of Representatives may move a motion of impeachment against the Chief
Justice of Nepal or a Judge of the Supreme Court, member of the Judicial
Council, chief or official of a Constitutional Body on the ground of his or her
failure to fulfil his or her duties of office because of serious violation of this
Constitution and law, incompetence or misconduct or failure to discharge the
duties of office honestly or serious violation of the code of conduct. If the
motion is passed by at least two thirds majority of the total number of the then
members of the House of Representatives, the concerned person shall relieve
of his or her office.
There shall be an impeachment recommendation committee in
the House of Representatives for the purpose of making recommendation after
inquiring into whether there exist the ground and reason for moving a motion
of impeachment against any person under clause (2).
The committee under clause (3) shall consist of eleven members
of the House of Representatives.
If at least three members of the House of Representatives certify
and submit a petition that the received information, notice or petition is
admissible on the ground of serious violation of the Constitution or
incompetence or misconduct or failure to discharge the duties of office
honestly or serious violation of the code of conduct by the person relieving of
office on impeachment under clause (2), and the committee under clause (3),
upon inquiring into such petition in accordance with Federal law, makes
recommendation to the House of Representatives for impeachment
proceedings, a motion of impeachment under clause (2) may be moved.
After the commencement of impeachment proceedings under
clause (2), the Chief Justice of Nepal or Judge of the Supreme Court, member
of the Judicial Council, chief or official of the Constitutional Body shall not be
allowed to discharge the duties of his or her office pending the settlement of
such proceedings.
A person who is charged with impeachment under clause (1) or
(2) shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to defend himself or
herself.
Nothing shall bar the taking of action under the Federal law in
relation to the offence, if any, committed while in office by the President or
Vice-President, Chief Justice of Nepal or a Judge of the Supreme Court of
Nepal, member of the Judicial Council, chief or official of a Constitutional
Body who is relieved of office upon the passage of a motion of impeachment
under this Article.
A person who is relieved of office on the passage of a motion of
impeachment under clause (1) or (2) shall not be entitled to obtain any facility
accruing from such office and to be appointed or nominated to any public
office in the future.
Other matters relating to impeachment shall be as provided for in
the Federal law.
102. Penalty for unauthorized presence or voting: If a person who has not taken oath
under Article 88 or who is not a member of the Federal Parliament is present or
votes in the capacity of member in a meeting of either House of the Federal
Parliament or of its committee, the person shall, by order of the person chairing
the meeting, be fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each instance of
such presence or voting, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
103. Privileges: (1) There shall be full freedom of speech in both Houses of the
Federal Parliament; and no member shall be arrested, detained or prosecuted in
any court for anything expressed or any vote cast by him or her in the House.
Each House of the Federal Parliament shall, subject to this
Constitution, have full power to regulate and decide its internal business, and
the concerned House shall have the exclusive right to decide whether or not
any of its proceedings is regular or irregular. No question shall be raised in any
court in this behalf.
No comment shall be made about the good faith concerning any
proceeding of any House of the Federal Parliament, and no publication and
broadcasting of any kind shall be made about anything said by any member,
intentionally distorting or misinterpreting the meaning of the speech.
The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall also apply to other
persons who are entitled to participate in the meetings of the House than the
members of the Federal Parliament.
No proceedings shall be initiated in any court against any person
in respect of the publication, under the authority granted by any House of the
Federal Parliament, of any document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4), "House" means
the House of Representatives or the National Assembly, and includes a joint
sitting or committee or joint committee of the Federal Parliament.
No member of the Federal Parliament shall be arrested during the
period from the issuance of a notice summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to bar the arresting
under the Federal law of any member on a criminal charge. If any member is
so arrested, the authority making such arrest shall forthwith give information
thereof to the person presiding over the concerned House.
Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed to constitute
contempt of the Federal Parliament, and the concerned House shall have the
exclusive right to decide whether any privilege has been breached.
If any person is in contempt of any House, the person presiding
over the concerned House may, after a decision by the House to that effect,
admonish, warn or impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or of a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees on such
person, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
Provided that if such person apologies to the satisfaction of the
concerned House, it may pardon, remit or commute the sentence imposed on,
him or her.
Other matters relating to the privileges of the Federal Parliament
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
104. Procedures relating to conduct of business: (1) Each House of the Federal
Parliament shall frame rules to conduct its business, maintain order during its
meetings and regulate the constitution, functions and procedures of the
committees and procedures of the House or its committee. Until such rules are
framed, the Federal Parliament shall regulate its procedures on its own.
The conduct of business of the joint sitting of the Federal
Parliament, and constitution and proceedings of the joint committee of the
Federal Parliament shall be regulated by the rules or procedures approved by
the joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
105. Restriction on discussion: No discussion shall be held in either House of the
Federal Parliament on any matters that may cause adverse effect on the
dispensation of justice on any cases which are sub judice in any courts of
Nepal and on any judicial acts done by Judges in the course of performance of
their duties.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall be deemed to bar the
expression of opinions about the conduct of a Judge during deliberations held
on a motion of impeachment.
106. Secretary General and Secretary of Federal Parliament: (1) The President shall
appoint the Secretary General of the House of Representatives on
recommendation of both the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the
Chairperson of the National Assembly, the Secretary of the House of
Representatives on recommendation of the Speaker, and the Secretary of the
National Assembly on recommendation of the Chairperson.
The qualification, functions, duties, powers and other conditions
of service of the Secretary General of the Federal Parliament, Secretary of the
House of Representatives and Secretary of the National Assembly shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
107. Secretariat of Federal Parliament: There shall be a Secretariat for conducting
and managing the business of the Federal Parliament. The establishment of
such Secretariat and other matters related thereto shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.
108. Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson of the National Assembly, chairpersons of the committees and
members of the Federal Parliament shall be as provided for in the Federal law,
and as specified by the Government of Nepal until such law is made.

Part-9
Federal Legislative Procedures
109. Legislative powers of Federal Parliament: The legislative powers of the
Federal Parliament shall be as enumerated in the lists of Schedule-5, Schedule7 and Schedule-9.
110. Procedures for introduction of Bills: (1) A Bill may, subject to this
Constitution, be introduced in any House of the Federal Parliament.
Provided that a Money Bill shall be introduced only in the House of
Representatives.
A Money Bill and a Bill concerning a security body including the
Nepal Army, Nepal Police and Armed Police Force, Nepal shall be introduced
only as a Government Bill.
"Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or all of the following
subjects:
the imposition, collection, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of taxes,
the preservation of the Federal Consolidated Fund or any
other Federal Government Fund, the deposit of moneys
into and the appropriation or the withdrawal of moneys
from such Funds, or the reduction, increment or
cancellation of appropriations or of proposed expenditures
from such Funds,
the regulation of matters relating to the borrowing of
money or the giving of guarantee by the Government of
Nepal, or any matter pertaining to the amendment of the
law with respect to any financial obligations undertaken or
to be undertaken by the Government of Nepal,
the custody and investment of all revenues received by
any Federal Government Fund, moneys acquired through
the repayment of loans, and grant moneys, or accounts or
audits of the accounts of the Government of Nepal, or
Other matters directly related to any of the subjects
specified in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d).
Provided that any Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by
the reason only that it provides for the levying of any charges and fees
such as license fee, application fee, renewal fee or for the imposition of
fines or penalty of imprisonment.
If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the
decision of the Speaker thereon shall be final.
111. Procedures for passage of Bills: (1) A Bill passed by one House of the Federal
Parliament shall be transmitted to the other House as soon as possible and such
Bill, if passed by the receiving House, shall be presented to the President for
assent.
A Money Bill passed by the House of Representatives shall be
transmitted to the National Assembly. The National Assembly shall, after
deliberations on such Bill, send back the Bill to the House of Representatives
within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the Bill, with suggestions, if any.
The House of Representatives shall, upon deliberations on a Bill
returned with suggestions under clause (2), present the Bill incorporating such
suggestions as it may deem appropriate to the President for assent.
If the National Assembly does not return a Money Bill received
under clause (2) for more than fifteen days, the House of Representatives may
present the Bill to the President for assent.
Any Bill, except for a Money Bill, passed by the House of
Representatives and transmitted to the National Assembly shall be returned
with approval or suggestions within two months from the date of receipt. If the
National Assembly does not return the Bill within that period, the House of
Representatives may, by a resolution passed by a majority of the total number
of its existing members, present the Bill to the President for assent.
If any Bill, other than a Money Bill, passed by one House is
rejected or is passed with amendments by the other House, the Bill shall be
returned to the House where it originated.
If the House of Representatives, in considering a Bill which has
been rejected or amended by the National Assembly under clause (6), passes it
again as it was or with amendments, by a majority of the total number of its
existing members, the Bill shall be presented to the President for assent.
If a Bill which has been returned with amendments by the House
of Representatives to the National Assembly under clause (6) is also again
passed, with such amendments, by a majority of the number of existing
members of the National Assembly, the Bill shall be presented to the President
for assent.
The following Bills shall be referred to a joint sitting of the both
Houses, and if the joint sitting passes the Bill as it was or with amendments,
the House in which the Bill originated shall present it to the President for
assent:
Bills which, though passed by the National Assembly,
have been rejected by the House of Representatives, or
Bills which have been returned to the National Assembly
with amendments by the House of Representatives, but the
National Assembly has not agreed on such amendments.
Even though the session of a House is prorogued while a Bill is
under its consideration, deliberations on the Bill may continue at the
succeeding session.
Provided that if the House of Representatives is dissolved or its term
expires when any Bill introduced in the House of Representatives is under its
consideration or when any Bill passed by the House of Representatives is
under consideration in the National Assembly, such Bill shall lapse.
112. Withdrawal of Bills: One who has introduced a Bill may, with the approval of
the House, withdraw the Bill.
113. Assent on Bills: (1) A Bill which is to be submitted to the President for assent
under Article 111 shall be so submitted by the Speaker or the Chairperson of
the House in which the Bill originated after it has been certified by him or her.
Provided that in the case of a Money Bill, the Speaker shall so certify.
A Bill submitted to the President for his or her assent in
accordance with this Article shall be assented to within fifteen days, both
Houses shall be informed thereof as soon as possible.
If the President is of the opinion that any Bill, except a Money
Bill, submitted for assent needs reconsideration, he or she may, within fifty
days from the date of presentation of such Bill, return the Bill with his or her
message to the House in which the Bill originated.
If any Bill is returned with a message by the President, and both
Houses reconsider, passes such Bill as it was or with amendments and submit it
again, the President shall give assent to that Bill within fifteen days of such
submission.
A Bill shall become an Act after the President gives assent to it.
114. Provisions relating to Ordinance: (1) If, at any time, except when both Houses
of the Federal Parliament are in session, circumstances exist which render it
necessary to take immediate action, the President may, on recommendation of
the Council of Ministers, promulgate an Ordinance.
An Ordinance promulgated under clause (1) shall have the same
force and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance:
shall be tabled at the session of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament held after the promulgation, and if not passed
by both Houses, it shall ipso facto cease to be effective,
may be repealed at any time by the President, and
shall, unless rendered ineffective or repealed under subclause (a) or (b), ipso facto cease to be effective at the
expiration of sixty days after the day on which a meeting
of both Houses is held.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "day on which a meeting
of both Houses is held" means the day on which a session or meeting of
both Houses of the Federal Parliament commences or is held, and this
term means the later day on which a meeting of the House is held if the
Houses of the Federal Parliament meet on different dates.

Part-10
Federal Financial Procedures
No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall be levied and
collected except in accordance with law.
No loan shall be raised and guarantee given by the Government
of Nepal except as provided for in the Federal law.
Federal Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of trusts (Guthi), all
revenues received by the Government of Nepal, all loans raised on the security
of revenues, all amounts received in repayment of any loans made under the
authority of any Act and any other moneys received by the Government of
Nepal shall, except as otherwise provided by a Federal Act, be credited to a
Government Fund to be known as the Federal Consolidated Fund.
Expenditures from Consolidated Fund or Government Fund: No expenditure
shall be incurred out of the Federal Consolidated Fund or any other Federal
Government Fund except the following:
moneys charged on the Federal Consolidated Fund,
moneys required to meet the expenditure under a Federal
Appropriation Act,
advance moneys authorized by a Federal Act required to meet
expenditures, when an Appropriation Bill is under consideration,
expenditures to be incurred in extraordinary circumstances under
a Federal Vote of Credit Act which contains only a description of
expenditures.
Provided that matters relating to the Federal Contingency Fund shall be
governed by Article 124.
Expenditures chargeable on Federal Consolidated Fund: The expenditures
relating to the following matters shall be charged on the Federal Consolidated
Fund, and approval of the Federal Parliament shall not be required for such
expenditures:
the amount required as remuneration and facilities of the
President and the Vice-president,
the amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Chief Justice of Nepal, Judges of the Supreme Court, and
members of the Judicial Council,
the amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Speaker
Deputy
Speaker
House
Representatives, and the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson
of the National Assembly,
the amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
chiefs and officials of the Constitutional Bodies,
the amount required as remuneration and facilities of the Chiefs
of States,
the administrative expenses of the Office of the President or the
Vice President, the Supreme Court, the Judicial Council, the
Constitutional Bodies, and the offices of Chiefs of States,
all charges relating to debts for which the Government of Nepal
is liable,
any sum required to satisfy any judgment or decree made by a
court against the Government of Nepal, and
any other sum to be chargeable by the Federal law on the Federal
Consolidated Fund.
Estimates of revenues and expenditures: (1) The Minister for Finance of the
Government of Nepal shall, in respect of every financial year, lay before the
joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament an annual estimate
setting out, inter alia, the following matters:
an estimate of revenues,
the moneys required to meet the charges on the Federal
Consolidated Fund, and
the moneys required to meet the expenditure to be provided for
by a Federal Appropriation Act.
The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to clause (1) shall also be
accompanied by a statement of the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the
previous financial year and particulars of whether the objectives of the
expenses have been achieved.
The Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal shall lay
before the Federal Parliament an estimate of revenues and expenditures under
clause (1) on the 15th day of Jesta (mid May) each year.
120. Appropriation Act: The moneys to be spent under an Appropriation Act shall
be specified under concerned heads in an Appropriation Bill.
121. Supplementary estimates: (1) The Minister for Finance of the Government of
Nepal may lay before the House of Representatives a supplementary estimate
if it is found in any financial year,-
that the sum authorized to be spent for a particular service by the
Appropriation Act for the current financial year is insufficient, or
that a need has arisen for expenditures on some new service not
provided for by the Appropriation Act for that year, or
that the expenditures made during that financial year are in
excess of the amount authorized by the Appropriation Act.
The sums included in the supplementary estimate shall be
specified under the related heads in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
122. Votes on account: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Part, a portion of the expenditure estimated for the financial year may, when an
Appropriation Bill is under consideration, be incurred in advance, as provided
for in the Federal Act.
A Vote on Account Bill shall not be introduced until the estimates
of revenues and expenditures have been laid in accordance with Article 119,
and the sums involved in the Vote on Account shall not exceed one-third of the
estimate of expenditures for the financial year.
The expenditures incurred in accordance with the Federal Vote
on Account Act shall be included in the Appropriation Bill.
123. Votes of credit: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, if
owing to an emergency due to either natural causes or a threat of external
aggression or internal disturbances or other reasons, it appears to be
impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or interest of the country to
specify the details required under Article 119, the Minister for Finance of the
Government of Nepal may lay before the House of Representatives a Vote of
Credit Bill giving only a statement of expenditures.
124. Federal contingency fund: (1) A Federal Act may create a fund to be known as
the contingency fund into which such moneys as may be determined by the
Federal Act shall be paid from time to time.
The Government of Nepal shall control the fund under clause (1),
and may meet any unforeseen expenditure out of such fund.
The amount of the expenditure under clause (2) shall be
reimbursed as soon as possible as provided for in the Federal Act.
125. Act relating to financial procedures: Matters relating to the transfer of moneys
appropriated by the Federal Act from one head to another and other financial
procedures shall be as provided for in the Federal Act.

Part-11
Judiciary
126. Courts to exercise powers relating to justice: (1) Powers relating to justice in
Nepal shall be exercised by courts and other judicial bodies in accordance with
this Constitution, other laws and the recognized principles of justice.
All shall abide by the orders or decisions made in the course of
trial of lawsuits by the courts.
127. Courts: (1) There shall be the following courts in Nepal:
Supreme Court,
High Court, and
District Court.
In addition to the courts under clause (1), judicial bodies may be
formed at the Local level to try cases under law or other bodies as required
may be formed to pursue alternative dispute settlement methods.
128. Supreme Court: (1) There shall be a Supreme Court in Nepal.
The Supreme Court shall be a court of record. All courts and
judicial bodies shall, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, be
under the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall have the final authority to
interpret this Constitution and laws.
The Supreme Court may inspect, supervise and give necessary
directives to, it and courts, specialized courts or other judicial bodies under its
jurisdiction, in relation to matters relating to judicial administration or
management.
All must abide by any interpretation of the Constitution or a law
made by or any legal principle laid down by the Supreme Court in the course
of trying a lawsuit. If anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of justice
by, or disregard any order or judgment handed down by, it or any of its
subordinate courts, the Supreme Court may, in accordance with law, initiate
proceedings and impose punishment for contempt.
129. Appointment and qualification of Chief Justice of Nepal and Judges of
Supreme Court: (1) The Supreme Court shall consist of a maximum of twenty
Judges, in addition to the Chief Justice of Nepal.
The President shall appoint the Chief Justice, on recommendation
of the Constitutional Council, and other Judges of the Supreme Court, on
recommendation of the Judicial Council.
Any person who has served as a Judge of the Supreme Court for
at least three years shall be qualified for appointment as the Chief Justice.
The term of office of the Chief Justice shall be six years.
Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a bachelor's degree in law
and served as the Chief Judge or a Judge of a High Court for at least five years
or who has obtained a bachelor's degree in law and constantly practiced law as
a senior advocate or advocate for at least fifteen years or who is a distinguished
jurist having constantly worked for at least fifteen years in the judicial or legal
field or who has served in the post of Gazetted first class or a higher post of the
Judicial Service for at least twelve years shall be deemed qualified for
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Explanation: The period during which one has served as the Chief Judge or
Judge of an Appellate Court prior to the commencement of this Constitution
shall, for the purposes of this clause, be deemed to be the period of service in
the capacity of the Chief Judge or Judge of the High Court.
If the office of the Chief Justice falls vacant or the Chief Justice
is unable to carry out the duties of his or her office by reason of illness or
otherwise or he or she cannot be present in the Supreme Court by reason of a
leave of absence or his or her being outside of Nepal, the senior-most Judge of
the Supreme Court shall act as the Acting Chief Justice.
130. Conditions of service and facilities of Chief Justice and Judges: (1) If the Chief
Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court who has served for at least five years
resigns or undergoes compulsory retirement or dies, he or she shall be entitled
to such pension as may be provided for in the Federal law.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the
remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Justice and Judges of
the Supreme Court shall be provided for in the Federal law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) and (2), the
Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court who has been removed from
office by way of impeachment or who has been punished by a court for a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude shall not be entitled to gratuity or
pension.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief
Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be altered to his or her
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
131. Vacation of office of Chief Justice or Judge of Supreme Court: The office of
the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing before the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her under

Article 101,
if the President removes from office the Chief Justice, on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council, and the Judge of
the Supreme Court, on recommendation of the Judicial Council,
on the ground that he or she is unable to discharge his or her
duties because of physical or mental illness,
if he or she is punished by a court for a criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
if he or she dies.
132. Chief Justice and Judges of Supreme Court not to be engaged in any other
office: (1) No Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme Court shall be engaged in
or deputed to any office other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the
Judicial Council, depute a Judge of the Supreme Court to work concerning
judicial inquiry, or to legal or judicial investigation or research for a specified
period.
No person who has once held the office of Chief Justice or a
Judge of the Supreme Court shall be eligible for appointment to any
government office, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution.
133. Jurisdiction of Supreme Court: (1) Any citizen of Nepal may file a petition in
the Supreme Court to have any law or any part thereof declared void on the
ground of inconsistency with this Constitution because it imposes an
unreasonable restriction on the enjoyment of any fundamental right conferred
by this Constitution or on any other ground, or to have any law or any part
thereof made by a State Assembly declared void because it is inconsistent with
any law made by the Federal Parliament or to have any law or any part thereof
made by a Municipal Assembly or Village Assembly declared void because it
is inconsistent with a law made by the Federal Parliament or the State
Assembly, and the Supreme Court shall have an extra-ordinary power to
declare that law to be void either ab initio or from the date of its decision if the
law appears to be so inconsistent.
The Supreme Court shall, for the enforcement of the fundamental
rights conferred by this Constitution or of any other legal right for which no
other remedy has been provided or for which the remedy even though provided
appears to be inadequate or ineffective or for the settlement of any
constitutional or legal question involved in any dispute of public interest or
concern, have the extraordinary power to issue necessary and appropriate
orders, provide appropriate remedies, enforce such right or settle such dispute.
Under the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under clause (2), the
Supreme Court may issue appropriate orders and writs including the writs of
habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo warranto.
Provided that except on the ground of lack of jurisdiction, the Supreme
Court shall not under this clause interfere with any internal proceedings of the
Federal Parliament or State Assembly, and with any proceedings instituted by
the Federal Parliament or State Assembly concerning violation of its privileges
and penalties imposed therefor.
Subject to this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, as provided
in a Federal law, have the power to originally try and settle cases, hear appeals,
test judgments referred for confirmation, revise cases, hear petitions or review
its judgments or final orders. Judges other than those having handed down the
previous judgment shall make such review.
The Supreme Court shall settle appeals from cases originally
tried and settled by a High Court and matters of public importance involving
questions of interpretation of the Constitution and law or cases recommended
by a High Court, accompanied by its opinion, that it is reasonable that decision
be made by the Supreme Court.
Other powers and procedures of the Supreme Court shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
134. Power to transfer of cases: (1) If cases which involve substantially the same
questions are sub judice before the Supreme Court and a High Court, and the
Supreme Court is satisfied on its own or on application by the Attorney
General or parties to such cases that such questions are of public importance,
the Supreme Court shall have the power to procure and adjudge the cases
together.
If there exists a special situation where judicial impartiality can
be questioned if a case filed in a High Court is tried by that Court, the Supreme
Court may, for reasons and grounds to be recorded, order such case to be
transferred from such High Court to another High Court and tried by the latter
High Court, in accordance with law.
135. Not to be engaged in practice of law: No Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme
Court may, after retirement from service, be engaged in the practice of law,
mediation or arbitration proceedings before any office or court.
136. Responsibility of Chief Justice: The Chief Justice shall have the ultimate
responsibility to make effective the administration of justice by the Supreme
Court, subordinate courts, specialized courts or other judicial bodies.
137. Formation of Constitutional Bench: (1) There shall be a Constitutional Bench
in the Supreme Court. The Constitutional Bench shall consist of the Chief
Justice and other four Judges designated by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council.
The Bench under clause (1) shall originally try and settle the
following cases, in addition to the petitions filed in accordance with clause (1)
of Article 133:
Disputes relating to jurisdiction between the Federation and a
State, between States, between a State and a Local level and
between Local levels,
Disputes relating to election to members of the Federal
Parliament or State Assembly and matters relating to
disqualification of a member of the Federal Parliament or of the
State Assembly.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 133, if it appears
that any case sub judice in the Supreme Court involves a question of serious
constitutional interpretation, the Chief Justice may appoint such case to be tried
by the Bench under clause (1).
Other provisions relating to the functioning of the Constitutional
Bench shall be as determined by the Supreme Court.
138. Annual report: (1) The Supreme Court, Judicial Council and Judicial Service
Commission shall, every year, submit annual reports to the President, and the
President shall submit such reports to the Federal Parliament through the Prime
Minister.
If the Federal Parliament, upon deliberating on the annual reports
submitted under clause (1), deems it necessary to give any suggestion, it may
give such suggestion to the concerned body through the Government of Nepal,
Ministry of Law and Justice.
Other provisions relating to annual reports under clause (1) shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
139. High Courts: (1) There shall be a High Court in each State.
If anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of justice by, or
disregard any order or judgment handed down by, it or any of its subordinate
courts or judicial bodies, the High Court may initiate proceedings on and
impose punishment for contempt, as provided for in the Federal law.
Each High Court shall consist of such number of Judges, in
addition to the Chief Judge, as provided for in the Federal law.
140. Appointment and qualification of Chief Judge and Judges of High Court: (1)
The Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of the Judicial Council, appoint
the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court.
Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a bachelor's degree in law
and served as a Judge of a District Court for at least five years or who has
obtained a bachelor's degree in law and constantly practiced law as a senior
advocate or advocate for at least ten years or who has constantly been engaged
in the teaching or research of law or in any other field relation to law or justice
for at least ten years or who has served in the post of at least Gazetted first
class of the Judicial Service for at least five years shall be deemed qualified for
appointment as the Chief Judge or a Judge of the High Court.
Appointments to the Chief Judge and Judges of a High Court
shall be made from amongst the persons who have possessed the qualification
under clause (2) on the basis of the proportion of cases settled by him or her
annually and of evaluation of cases upheld, quashed or reversed by superior
courts in the course of final decision thereof, in the case of a District Judge,
and of his or her seniority, qualification and evaluation of standard of
performance of business, in the case of a person who has served in the post of
at least Gazetted first class of the Judicial Service, and of evaluation of
seniority,
professional
continuity,
honesty,
professional
conduct
contribution made to the field of law and justice, in the case of others.
If the office of the Chief Judge falls vacant or the Chief Judge is
otherwise unable to carry out the duties of his or her office or cannot be present
in the High Court by reason of a leave of absence or his or her being outside of
the State, the senior-most Judge of the High Court shall act as the Acting Chief
Judge.
141. Conditions of service and facilities of Chief Judge and Judges: (1) Except as
otherwise provided in this Constitution, the remuneration and other conditions
of service of the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court shall be provided
for in the Federal law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the Chief
Judge or a Judge of a High Court who has been removed from office upon
action by the Judicial Council or upon punishment by a court for a criminal
offence involving moral turpitude shall not be entitled to gratuity or pension.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where the Judicial
Council has removed him or her from office on the ground of inability to
perform the duties of his or her office because of physical or mental illness.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief
Judge or a Judge of the High Court shall not be altered to his or her
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
142. Vacation of office of Chief Judge or Judge: (1) The office of Chief Judge or
Judge of a High Court shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing before the Chief
Justice,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-three years,
if he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council, on the ground of
his or her incompetence, bad conduct, failure to perform
his or her duties honestly, performance of business with
mala fide intention or serious violation by him or her of
the code of conduct required to be observed by him or her,
if he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council on the ground
that he or she is unable to discharge his or her duties
because of physical or mental illness,
if he or she is punished by a court for a criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
if he or she dies.
A Judge who is facing a charge shall be provided with a
reasonable opportunity to defend himself or herself prior to removing him or
her from the office under sub-clause (3) of clause (1). The Judge against whom
the proceedings have been so instituted shall not be allowed to perform the
duties of his or her office until the proceedings are completed.
Nothing shall bar the institution of action in accordance with the
Federal law against the Chief Judge or Judge who has been removed from
office for an offence which he or she has committed while in office.
143. Chief Judge and Judges not to be engaged in any other office and provisions
relating to transfer : (1) No Chief Judge or Judge of a High Court shall be
engaged in or deputed to any office other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the
Judicial Council, depute a Judge of the High Court to work concerning judicial
inquiry, or to legal or judicial investigation or research or to any business of
national concern for any specific period.
The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of the Judicial
Council, transfer a Judge of a High Court to another High Court.
144. Jurisdiction of High Court: (1) The High Court shall have the power to issue
necessary and appropriate orders, for the enforcement of the fundamental
rights conferred by this Constitution or for the enforcement of any other legal
right for which no other remedy has been provided or for which the remedy
even though provided appears to be inadequate or ineffective or for the
settlement of any legal question involved in any dispute of public interest or
concern,
For the purposes of clause (1), the High Court may issue
appropriate orders and writs including the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus,
certiorari, prohibition and quo warranto.
Provided that except on the ground of absence of jurisdiction, the High
Court shall not under this clause interfere with any internal proceedings of the
Federal Parliament or State Assembly, and with any proceedings instituted by
the Federal Parliament or State Assembly concerning violation of its privileges
and penalties imposed therefor.
The High Court shall, in accordance with the Federal law, have
the power to originally try and settle cases, hear appeals and test judgments
referred for confirmation.
Other powers and procedures of the High Court shall be as
provided by the Federal law.
145. Power to transfer cases: (1) If a High Court is of the opinion that a case which
is sub judice in a subordinate court within its jurisdiction involves a question
relating to a State law and it is essential to settle that question in order to
decide the case, the High Court may procure the case and dispose the case
wholly or decide only such question and remand the case to the court of first
instance.
If it is satisfied with the reason that there exists a situation where
judicial impartiality can be questioned if a case filed in a District Court is tried
by that Court, the High Court may, for reasons and grounds to be recorded,
order such case to be transferred from such District Court to another District
Court under its jurisdiction and tried by the latter District Court, as provided
for in the Federal law.
146. To be engaged in practice of law: A person who has retired from the office of a
Judge of a High Court may be engaged in the practice of law before the
Supreme Court and a High Court, other than the High Court where he or she
has served as a Judge and a subordinate court.
147. Responsibility of Chief Judge: The Chief Judge shall have the ultimate
responsibility to make effective the administration of justice by the High Court
and the Courts or other judicial bodies which are subordinate to it. For that
purpose, the Chief Judge may, subject to this Constitution and the Federal law,
give necessary direction to the subordinate Courts and judicial bodies.
148. District Courts: (1) There shall be a District Court in each District.
The Local level judicial bodies established in accordance with
the State law shall be subordinate to the District Court. The District Court may
inspect as well as supervise and give necessary direction to its subordinate
judicial bodies.
149. Appointment, qualification, remuneration and other conditions of service of
Judges of District Courts: (1) The Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of
the Judicial Council, appoint Judges of the District Courts.
The vacant posts of Judges of the District Court shall be filled as
follows:
twenty percent of the vacant posts, on the basis of evaluation of
seniority, qualification and competency, from amongst the
officers who have obtained bachelor's degree in law and served
for at least three years in the post of Gazetted Second Class of the
Judicial Service,
forty percent of the vacant posts, on the basis of open
competitive examination, from amongst the officers who have
obtained bachelor's degree in law and served for at least three
years in the post of Gazetted Second Class of the Judicial
Service,
the remaining forty percent of the vacant posts, on the basis of
open competitive examination, from amongst the citizens of
Nepal who, having obtained bachelor's degree in law, have
constantly practiced law for at least eight years as an advocate or
who, having obtained bachelor's degree in law, have served in a
Gazetted post of the Judicial Service for at least eight years or
have constantly been engaged in the teaching or research of law
or served in any other field of law or justice for at least eight
years.
The Judicial Service Commission shall, in accordance with the
Federal law, hold written and oral competitive examinations for the persons
who have possessed the qualification under sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause
(2), and make recommendation, in order of merit, to the Judicial Council for
appointment as District Judges.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Judges
of the District Court shall be provided for in the Federal law.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of a Judge of
the District Court shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
The office of a Judge of the District Court shall be vacant in any
of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing before the Chief
Justice,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-three years,
if he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council, on the ground of
his or her incompetence, misconduct, failure to perform
his or her duties honestly, performance of business with
mala fide intention or serious violation by him or her of
the code of conduct required to be observed by him or her,
if he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on
recommendation of the Judicial Council on the ground
that he or she is unable to continue service and discharge
his or her duties because of physical or mental illness,
if he or she is punished by a court for a criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
if he or she dies.
A District Judge who is accused shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to defend himself or herself before removing him or her from
office under sub-clause (c) of clause (6). The District Judge against whom the
proceedings are so initiated shall not perform the duties of his or her office
until the proceedings are completed.
Nothing shall prevent the instituting of action, in accordance with
the Federal law, against a District Judge who is removed from office for an
offence which he or she has committed while in office.
150. District Judges not to be engaged in any other office and provisions relating to
transfer : (1) No District Judge shall be engaged in or deputed to any office
other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the
Judicial Council, depute a District Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry,
or to legal or judicial investigation or research and to any election related work,
for a specified period.
The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of the Judicial
Council, transfer a District Judge from one District Court to another District
Court.
151. Jurisdiction of District Court: (1) Except as otherwise provided by the Federal
law, a District Court shall have the power to originally try and settle all cases
under its jurisdiction, to try petitions under law, including petitions of habeas
corpus and prohibition, hear appeals under law from decisions made by quasijudicial bodies, hear appeals from decisions made by Local level judicial
bodies formed under the State law, institute contempt proceedings and punish
for contempt under the Federal law if anyone makes obstruction in the
dispensation of justice by, or disregards any order or judgment by, it or any of
its subordinate courts.
Other provisions relating to the jurisdiction and procedures of the
District Courts shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
152. Specialized courts: (1) Other specialized courts, judicial bodies or tribunals
may be formed to try and settle specific types and nature of cases other than
those mentioned in Article 127, as provided for in the Federal law.
Provided that no specialized court, judicial body or tribunal shall be
formed for any specific case.
No criminal offence involving imprisonment for a term of more
than one year shall fall under the jurisdiction of a body other than a court,
specialized court, military court or judicial body.
153. Judicial Council: (1) There
shall
Judicial
Council
recommendation or give advice, in accordance with this Constitution, on the
appointment of, transfer of, disciplinary action against, and dismissal of,
Judges, and other matters relating to the administration of justice, which shall
consist of the following as its chairperson and members:
The Chief Justice
- Chairperson
The Federal Minister for Law and Justice
- Member
The senior-most Judge of the Supreme
Court
- Member
One jurist nominated by the President on
recommendation of the Prime Minister
- Member
A senior advocate or advocate who has
gained at least twenty years of experience,
to be appointed by the President on
recommendation
Nepal
Association
- Member
The term of office of the members under sub-clauses (d) and (e)
of clause (1) shall be four years, and their remuneration and facilities shall be
equivalent to those of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
The members under sub-clauses (d) and (e) of clause (1) shall be
removed from office in the same manner and on the same grounds as a Judge
of the Supreme Court.
The chairperson and a member of the Judicial Council may study
the case associated with a complaint filed in respect of any Judge, and make a
report thereof to the Judicial Council.
If a preliminary inquiry of a complaint filed in respect of any
Judge reveals a need to have a detailed inquiry by an expert, the Judicial
Council may form an inquiry committee.
If a Judge, other than a Judge who can be removed from office
by way of impeachment in accordance with this Constitution, commits an
abuse of authority by way of corruption, the Judicial Council may investigate
into the matter and institute a case in accordance with law.
The Judicial Council must prepare updated records of the persons
who are qualified for appointment to offices of the Chief Justice, Judges of the
Supreme Court, Chief Judges and Judges of the High Courts.
Other functions, duties and powers of the Judicial Council shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
154. Judicial Service Commission: (1) In appointing, transferring or promoting
gazetted officers of the Federal Judicial Service or taking departmental action
concerning such officers in accordance with law, the Government of Nepal
shall act on recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission.
Provided that in making new permanent appointments to gazetted posts
of the Federal Judicial Service from persons who are not already in the Federal
Government Service or making promotions from non-gazetted posts of the
Federal Judicial Service to gazetted ones of that Service, the Government of
Nepal shall act on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, the Public Service
Commission shall hold open and internal competitive examinations to be held
for appointments to Gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial Service.
The Judicial Service Commission shall consist of the following
as its chairperson and members:
The Chief Justice
- Chairperson
The Federal Minister for Law and
Justice
- Member
seniormost
Judge
Supreme Court
- Member
The Chairperson of the Public
Service Commission
- Member
The Attorney General
- Member
Other functions, duties, powers and procedures of the Judicial
Service Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
155. Provisions relating to conditions of service and facilities: Provisions relating to
the remuneration, facilities and conditions of service of the employees of the
Federal Judicial Service shall be as provided for in the Federal Act.
156. Provisions relating to State Judicial Service Commission: Provisions relating to
the formation of a State Judicial Service Commission and the remuneration,
facilities and conditions of service of the employees of a State Judicial Service
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

Part12
Attorney General
157. Attorney General: (1) There shall be an Attorney General of Nepal.
The President shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister,
appoint the Attorney General. The Attorney General shall hold office during
the pleasure of the Prime Minister.
A person who is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of the
Supreme Court shall be eligible to be appointed as the Attorney General.
The office of the Attorney General shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President through
the Prime Minister,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Prime Minister,
if he or she dies.
The remuneration and other facilities of the Attorney General
shall be similar to those of a Judge of the Supreme Court. Other conditions of
service of the Attorney General shall be in accordance with law.
158. Functions, duties and powers of Attorney General: (1) The Attorney General
shall be the chief legal advisor to the Government of Nepal. It shall be the duty
of the Attorney General to give opinions and advices on constitutional and
legal matters to the Government of Nepal and such other authorities as the
Government of Nepal may specify.
The Attorney General or government attorneys subordinate to
him or her shall represent the Government of Nepal in lawsuits wherein the
rights, interests or concerns of the Government of Nepal are involved. Except
as provided otherwise in this Constitution, the Attorney General shall have the
right to make a final decision as to whether to institute any case on behalf of
the Government of Nepal in any court, judicial body or authority.
Opinion of the Attorney General must be obtained for
withdrawing a case filed on behalf of the Government of Nepal.
The Attorney General may, upon invitation by the Federal
Parliament or any of its committees, to appear and express his or her opinion
on any legal question in such a meeting.
In the course of discharging the duties of his or her office, the
Attorney General shall have the right to appear in any Court, office and
authority of Nepal.
The Attorney General shall, in the course of performing his or
her duties, have the power to carry out the following acts, in addition to that set
forth in clause (2):
to defend, on behalf of the Government of Nepal, any lawsuit in
which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a defendant,
to monitor, or cause to be monitored, whether any interpretation
given to a law or any legal principle laid down by the Supreme
Court in the course of hearing of lawsuits has been implemented,
if a complaint is made alleging that any person held in custody
has not been treated humanely subject to this Constitution or
such person has not been allowed to meet his or her relative or
through his or her legal practitioner or if information of such
matter is received, to inquire thereinto and give necessary
directive to the concerned authority to prevent such act.
The Attorney General may so delegate his or her functions,
duties and powers under this Article to his or her subordinate government
attorneys as to be exercised and complied with subject to the specified
conditions.
In addition to the functions, duties and powers mentioned in this
Article, other functions, duties and powers of the Attorney General shall be
pursuant to this Constitution and the Federal law.
159. Annual report: (1) The Attorney General shall, every year, submit to the
President an annual report on the works which he or she has performed
pursuant to this Constitution and the Federal law, and the President shall cause
such report to be laid before the Federal Parliament through the Prime
Minister.
The annual report to be submitted pursuant to clause (1) shall set
out, inter alia, the number of advices and opinions on constitutional and legal
matters rendered by him or her throughout the year, and short description of
such advices and opinions, details of cases instituted as state cases, details of
defence made in lawsuits in which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or
defendant, details of reforms to be made in the future in relation to cases to be
instituted as state cases and information relating to crime trends.
160. Chief Attorney: (1) There shall be a Chief Attorney in every State, who shall
be subordinate to the Attorney General.
The Chief of State shall, on recommendation of the concerned
Chief Minister, appoint the Chief Attorney. The Chief Attorney shall hold
office during the pleasure of the Chief Minister.
A person who is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of High
Court shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chief Attorney.
The office of the Chief Attorney shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief of State
through the Chief Minister,
if he or she is removed from office by the Chief of State on
recommendation of the Chief Minister,
if he or she dies.
The Chief Attorney shall be the chief legal advisor to the State
Government. It shall be the duty of the Chief Attorney to give opinions and
advices on constitutional and legal matters to the State Government and such
other authorities as the State Government may specify.
The Office of Attorney General shall manage the employees
under the Office of Chief Attorney.
The remuneration and other facilities of the Chief Attorney shall
be similar to those of a Judge of High Court. The functions, duties and powers
and other conditions of service of the Chief Attorney shall be as provided for in
the State law.
161. Provisions relating to conditions of service and facilities: Provisions relating to
the remuneration, facilities and conditions of service of the government
attorneys and other employees under the Attorney General shall be as provided
for in the Federal Act.

Part -13
State Executive
162. Executive power of State: (1) The executive power of a State shall, pursuant to
this Constitution and the State law, be vested in the State Council of Ministers.
Provided that if a State Executive does not exist because of enforcement
of Federal governance, the Chief of State shall exercise the executive power of
the State as directed by the Government of Nepal.
The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and
regulating the governance of the State shall, subject to this Constitution and
other laws, lie in the State Council of Ministers.
All State executive functions shall be performed in the name of
the State Government.
The executive power of the State shall be as mentioned in
Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9 subject to this Constitution.
Provided that the State Council of Ministers shall exercise the executive
powers in coordination with the Government of Nepal, except as explicitly
mentioned in this Constitution and in the Federal law in relation to concurrent
powers of the Federation and the State.
Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the State
Government pursuant to clause (3) and other instruments of authorization
pertaining thereto shall be authenticated as provided for in the State law.
163. Provisions relating to Chief of State: (1) There shall be a Chief of State in each
State, as a representative of the Government of Nepal.
The President shall appoint one Chief of State for each State.
The term of office of a Chief of State shall be five years except
where the President removes him or her from office prior to the expiration of
his or her term of office.
A person may not be the Chief of State for more than once in the
same State.
164. Qualification for Chief of State: A person who has the following qualification
shall be qualified to become the Chief of State:
being qualified for being a member of the Federal Parliament,
having completed the age of thirty five years, and
Not being disqualified by any law.
165. Vacation of office of Chief of State: (1) The office of the Chief of State shall
become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if his or her term of office expires and he or she is removed from
office by the President prior to expiration of the term,
if he or she dies.
If the office of the Chief of State of any State falls vacant, the
President may so designate the Chief of State of another State to act as such
also for such State.
166. Functions, duties and powers of Chief of State: (1) The Chief of State shall
exercise such powers and perform such duties as conferred to him or her
pursuant to this Constitution or law.
In exercising the powers or duties under clause (1), the Chief of
State shall perform all other functions to be performed by him or her on
recommendation and with the consent of the State Council of Ministers than
those functions specifically provided to be performed on recommendation of
any body or official pursuant to this Constitution or law. Such recommendation
and consent shall be submitted through the Chief Minister.
Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Chief of
State under clause (2) and other instrument of authorization pertaining thereto
shall be authenticated as provided for in the State law.
167. Oath by Chief of State: The Chief of State shall, prior to assuming office, take
an oath of office and secrecy before the President, as provided for in the
Federal law.
168. Constitution of State Council of Ministers: (1) The Chief of State shall appoint
the leader of the parliamentary party commanding a majority in the State
Assembly as the Chief Minister, and the State Council of Ministers shall be
constituted under his or her chairpersonship.
In cases where no party has a clear majority in the State
Assembly under clause (1), the Chief of State shall appoint as the Chief
Minister a member of the State Assembly who can command majority with the
support of two or more parties representing to the State Assembly.
In cases where the Chief Minister cannot be appointed under
clause (2) no later than thirty days after the date of declaration of the final
results of election to the State Assembly or the Chief Minister so appointed
fails to secure a vote of confidence under clause (4), the Chief of State shall
appoint as the Chief Minister the parliamentary party leader of the party which
has the highest number of members in the State Assembly.
The Chief Minister appointed under clause (2) or (3) shall obtain
a vote of confidence from the State Assembly no later than thirty days after the
date of such appointment.
In cases where the Chief Minister appointed under clause (3)
fails to obtain a vote of confidence under clause (4) and any member under
clause (2) presents a ground on which he or she can obtain a vote of confidence
in the State Assembly, the Chief of State shall appoint such a member as the
Chief Minister.
The Chief Minister appointed under clause (5) must obtain a vote
of confidence under clause (4).
In cases where the Chief Minister appointed under clause (5)
fails to obtain a vote of confidence or the Chief Minister cannot be appointed,
the Chief of State shall, on recommendation of the Chief Minister, dissolve the
State Assembly and appoint a date of election so that the election to another
State Assembly is completed within six months.
Procedures on the appointment of the Chief Minister under this
Article must be completed no later than thirty five days after the date of
declaration of the final results of election to the State Assembly held under this
Constitution or the date on which the office of the Chief Minister has fallen
vacant.
The Chief of State shall, on recommendation of the Chief
Minister, constitute the State Council of Ministers consisting of a maximum of
twenty percent of the total number of members of the State Assembly,
including the Chief Minister, in accordance with the inclusive principle, from
amongst the members of the State Assembly.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Minister" means a
Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister.
The Chief Minister and Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to State Assembly, and the Ministers shall be individually
responsible for the work of their respective Ministries to the Chief Minister and
the State Assembly.
169. Vacation of office of Chief Minister and Minister: (1) The office of the Chief
Minister shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief of State,
if a vote of no-confidence is passed against him or her under

Article 188 or a vote of confidence is not passed,
if he or she ceases to be a member of the State Assembly,
if he or she dies.
The office of a Minister shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief Minister,
if the Chief Minister removes him or her from office,
if the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant under sub-clause
(a), (b) or (c) of clause (1),
if he or she dies.
Even though the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant under
clause (1), the same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another
State Council of Ministers is constituted.
Provided that if the Chief Minister dies, the senior-most Minister shall
act as the Chief Minister until a new Chief Minister is appointed.
170. Appointment of non-member of State Assembly as Minister: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (9) of Article 168, the Chief of
State may, on the recommendation of the Chief Minister, appoint any person
who is not a member of the State Assembly as a Minister.
A Minister appointed under clause (1) must obtain membership
of the State Assembly within six months from the date of taking an oath by him
or her.
In the event of failure to obtain membership of the State
Assembly within the period mentioned in clause (2), he or she shall not be
eligible to be reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of the then
State Assembly.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who
has been defeated in the election to the then State Assembly shall be not
eligible to be appointed to the office of Minister under clause (1) during the
term of such State Assembly.
171. Remuneration and other Facilities of Chief Minister and Minister: The
remuneration and other facilities of the Chief Minister and Ministers shall be as
provided by a State Act, and until such Act is made, shall be as specified by the
State Government.
172. Oath: The Chief Minister and Ministers shall, before assuming their respective
offices, take an oath of office and secrecy before the Chief of State, and
Ministers of State and Assistant Ministers, before the Chief Minister, as
provided for in the State law.
173. To give information to Chief of State: The Chief Minister shall inform the
Chief of State about the following matters:
resolutions of the State Council of Ministers,
Bills to be introduced in the State Assembly,
such other necessary information as commanded by the Chief of
State on matters set forth in clauses (a) and (b), and
current general state of affairs of the State.
174. Transaction of business of State Government: (1) The allocation and
transaction of business of the State Government shall be carried out in
accordance with the rules approved by the State Government.
No question shall be raised in any court as to whether or not the
rules under clause (1) have been observed.

Part-14
State Legislature
175. State Legislature: The legislature of a State shall be unicameral, which shall be
called as the State Assembly.
176. Composition of State Assembly: (1) Each State Assembly shall consist of a
number of members, as follows:
Members in a number that is twice as many as the number of
members elected to the House of Representatives from the
concerned State, through the first past the post electoral system,
The number of members to be set under clause (a) shall be
considered to be sixty percent, and the rest forty percent
members to be elected, through the proportional electoral system.
Election constituencies shall be set on the basis of geography and
population as provided for in the Federal law, for the election to members
under sub-clause (a) of clause (1).
Sixty percent members of the State Assembly shall be elected in
accordance with the first past the post electoral system and the forty percent
members in accordance with the proportional electoral system.
Election to the members of the State Assembly under clause (3)
shall be held through adult suffrage by secret ballots in accordance with law.
Each citizen of Nepal who resides within the territory of the State
and who has completed the age of eighteen years shall have a right to vote in
any one election constituency in accordance with law.
The Federal law shall provide that, in fielding candidacy by
political parties for the election to the State Assembly under the proportional
electoral system, representation shall be ensured on the basis of a closed list
also from women, Dalit, indigenous, indigenous nationalities, Khas Arya,
Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims and backward regions, minority communities, on the
basis of population. In so fielding candidacy, regard shall also be had to
geographical balance of the concerned State.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "Khas Arya" means
Kshetri, Brahmin, Thakuri, Sanyasi (Dashnami) community.
In fielding candidacy under clause (6), political parties must
provide for representation of the persons with disabilities as well.
If the seat of a member of the State Assembly falls vacant while
its term still remains for more than six months, the vacancy shall be filled
through the same electoral system as through which such seat was filled in.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article, at
least one third of the total number of members elected from each political party
representing in the State Assembly must be women. If women are not so
elected as to constitute one third of the elected members of any political party
under sub-clause (a) of clause (1), such political party must, in electing
members under sub-clause (b) of that clause, so elect that women members
constitute at least one third of the total number of members elected to the State
Assembly from that party.
(10) A person who is qualified under Article 178 and entitled to vote
in an election to the members of the State Assembly may, subject to law, be a
candidate in any election constituency of the State.
Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in more than one election
constituencies at the same time.
(11) Other provisions relating to election to the State Assembly shall
be as provided for in the Federal law.
177. Term of State Assembly: (1) Unless dissolved earlier pursuant to this
Constitution, the term of the State Assembly shall be five years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the term of the
State Assembly may be extended by a State Act for a period not exceeding one
year in cases where a proclamation or order of a state of emergency is in effect.
The term of the State Assembly extended under clause (2) shall
ipso facto be terminated after the expiry of six months from the date of
voidance of the proclamation or order of the state of emergency in the
concerned State.
178. Qualification for member of State Assembly: (1) A person who has the
following qualification shall be qualified to become a member of the State
Assembly:
being a citizen of Nepal,
being a voter of the concerned State,
having completed the age of twenty five years,
not having been convicted of a criminal offense involving moral
turpitude,
not being disqualified by any law, and
not holding any office of profit.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "office of profit" means
any position, other than a political position which is to be filled by election or
nomination, for which a remuneration or economic benefit is paid out of a
government fund.
If a person who holds a political office to be filled by way of
election, nomination or appointment is elected as a member of the State
Assembly under this Part, his or her such office shall ipso facto be vacant with
effect from the day on which he or she takes an oath of such office.
179. Oath of member of State Assembly: Every member of the State Assembly
must, before taking part for the first time in the meeting of the Assembly or any
of its committees, take an oath as provided for in the State law.
180. Vacation of seat of member of State Assembly: The seat of a member of the
State Assembly shall become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing before the Speaker of
the State Assembly,
if he or she is no longer qualified or ceases to possess the
qualification under Article 178,
if the term of the State Assembly expires or it is dissolved,
if he or she absents himself or herself from ten consecutive
meetings, without giving notice to the State Assembly,
if the political party of which he or she was a member when
elected provides a notification as provided for in the Federal law
that he or she has defected from the party,
If he or she dies.
181. Decision as to disqualification of member: If a question arises as to whether
any member of the State Assembly is disqualified or has ceased to possess any
of the qualifications under Article 178, the Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme Court shall make the final decision of such question.
182. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of State Assembly: (1) The members of the State
Assembly shall, not later than fifteen days of the date of holding of the first
meeting of the State Assembly, elect a State Speaker and a Deputy State
Speaker from amongst themselves.
Election under clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman
out of the State Speaker and the Deputy State Speaker, and the State Speaker
and the Deputy State Speaker of the State Assembly shall be representatives
from different parties.
Provided that if there is no representation of more than one party in the
State Assembly or no candidacy is filed by more than one party despite
representation, nothing shall prevent the members of the same party from being
the State Speaker and the Deputy State Speaker of the State Assembly.
If the office of the State Speaker or the Deputy State Speaker
falls vacant, the members of the State Assembly shall fill the vacancy through
election to the State Speaker or the Deputy State Speaker from amongst
themselves.
The Deputy State Speaker shall, in the absence of the State
Speaker of the State Assembly, chair the State Assembly.
If the election to the State Speaker and the Deputy State Speaker
has not taken place, or if both the positions have become vacant, the attending
member who is by age the senior-most shall chair the meeting of the State
Assembly.
The office of the State Speaker or the Deputy State Speaker of
the State Assembly shall become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she ceases to be a member of the State Assembly,
Provided that, in the event of the dissolution of the State
Assembly, the State Speaker and the Deputy State Speaker of the State
Assembly holding their respective offices shall continue in office until
the previous day of the filing of nominations for another election to the
State Assembly,
if he or she resigns in writing,
if a resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total
number of the then members of the State Assembly to the effect
that his or her conduct is not compatible with his or her office.
The State Deputy Speaker shall preside over a meeting at which
deliberations are to be held on a motion that the conduct of the Speaker of the
State Assembly is not compatible with his or her office. The State Speaker
shall be entitled to take part and vote in the deliberations on such motion.
183. Summoning and prorogation of session of State Assembly: (1) The Chief of
State shall summon a session of the State Assembly within twenty days of the
declaration of final results of the election to the State Assembly. Thereafter, the
Chief of State shall, from time to time, summon other sessions pursuant to this
Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two consecutive sessions shall
not exceed six months.
The Chief of State may prorogue the sessions of the State
Assembly.
If, during the prorogation or recess of the session of the State
Assembly, one-fourth of the total number of its members make a petition that it
is expedient to convene a session or meeting, the Chief of State shall specify
the date and time for such session or meeting. The State Assembly shall meet
or commence its session at the date and time so specified.
184. Address by Chief of State: (1) The Chief of State may address a sitting of the
State Assembly, and summon the members for that purpose.
The Chief of State shall address the first session after an election
to the State Assembly and a sitting of the State Assembly after the
commencement of the first session of each year.
185. Quorum of State Assembly: Except as otherwise provided for in this
Constitution, no question or motion shall be presented for decision in the State
Assembly unless one-fourth of the total number of its members are present.
186. Voting in State Assembly: All questions submitted for decision in the State
Assembly shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present and
participate in voting. The member chairing the meeting shall not have the right
to vote.
Provided that he or she may exercise his or her casting vote in the case
of a tie.
187. Privileges of State Assembly: (1) There shall be full freedom of speech in the
State Assembly, subject to this Constitution, and no member shall be arrested,
detained or prosecuted in any court for anything expressed or any vote cast by
him or her in the State Assembly.
The State Assembly shall, subject to this Constitution, have full
power to regulate and decide its internal business, and it shall be the exclusive
right of the State Assembly to decide whether or not any of its proceedings is
regular or irregular. No question shall be raised in any court in this behalf.
No comment shall be made about the good faith concerning any
proceeding of the State Assembly, and no publication and broadcasting of any
kind shall be made about anything said by any member, intentionally distorting
or misinterpreting the meaning of the speech.
The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall also apply to other
persons who are entitled to participate in the meetings of the State Assembly
than the members of State Assembly.
No proceedings shall be initiated in any court against any person
in respect of the publication, under the authority granted by the State
Assembly, of any document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause and clauses (1), (2), (3) and
(4), "State Assembly" means and includes the meeting of a committee of the
State Assembly.
No member of the State Assembly may be arrested during the
period from the issuance of a notice summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the arrest
under the law of any member on a criminal charge. If any member is so
arrested, the authority making such arrest shall forthwith give information
thereof to the person presiding over the State Assembly.
Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed to constitute
contempt of the State Assembly, and the State Assembly shall have the
exclusive right to decide whether any breach of its privileges has taken place.
If any person is in contempt of the State Assembly, the person
presiding over the State Assembly may, after a decision by the State Assembly
to that effect, admonish, warn or impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or of a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees on
such person, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
Provided that if such a person submits an apology to the satisfaction of
the State Assembly, it may either pardon him or her or remit or commute the
sentence imposed on him or her.
Other matters relating to privileges of the State Assembly shall
be as provided in the State law.
188. Provisions relating to vote of confidence and motion of no-confidence: (1) The
Chief Minister may, whenever he or she considers necessary or appropriate to
show that he or she has confidence from the State Assembly, table a resolution
to that effect in the State Assembly for the vote of confidence.
If the political party which the Chief Minister represents is
divided or a political party in coalition State Government withdraws its
support, the Chief Minister shall table a resolution in the State Assembly for a
vote of confidence within thirty days.
If a resolution tabled under clauses (1) and (2) is not passed by a
majority of the total number of then members of the State Assembly, the Chief
Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
One-fourth of the total number of then members of the State
Assembly may table in writing a motion of no-confidence against the Chief
Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence may not be tabled until the first
two years after the appointment of the Chief Minister and until another one
year after the date of failure of the motion of no confidence once tabled.
A motion of no confidence to be tabled under clause (4) shall
also indicate the name of a member proposed for Chief Minister.
If a motion of no confidence tabled under clause (4) is passed by
a majority of the total number of then members of the State Assembly, the
Chief Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
If the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant because of the
passage of a vote of no-confidence under clause (6), the Chief of State shall, in
accordance with Article 168, appoint as the Chief Minister the member of the
State Assembly proposed under clause (5).
189. Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister entitled to take part in
meetings of State Assembly: The Minister, Minister of State and Assistant
Minister shall be entitled to attend, and take part in the proceedings and
deliberations of, the State Assembly or its committees.
Provided that a Minister, Minister of State or Assistant Minister who is
not a member of the State Assembly shall not be entitled to vote in a meeting
of the State Assembly or its committee, and a Minister, Minister of State or
Assistant Minister shall not be entitled to vote in a meeting of a committee of
which he or she is not a member.
190. Penalty for unauthorized presence or voting in State Assembly: If a person who
has not taken oath under Article 179 or who is not a member of the State
Assembly is present or votes in a meeting of the State Assembly or of its
committee as a member, the person shall, by order of the person chairing the
meeting, be fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each instance of such
presence or voting, and such a fine shall be recovered as a government due.
191. Restriction on discussion: No discussion shall be held in the State Assembly on
any matters that may cause adverse effect on the dispensation of justice on any
cases which are sub judice in any courts of Nepal and on any judicial acts done
by Judges in the course of performance of their duties.
192. Transaction of business in case of vacancy in seat of member: The State
Assembly shall have the power to transact its business notwithstanding any
vacancy in the seat of its member; and no proceedings of the State Assembly
already conducted shall become invalid even if it is subsequently discovered
that a person who was not so entitled took part in such proceedings.
193. Power of State Assembly to form committees: The State Assembly may, in
accordance with its rules, form committees or special committees, as required,
in order to manage its working procedures.
194. Procedures relating to conduct of business of State Assembly: The State
Assembly shall frame rules to conduct its business, maintain order during its
meetings and regulate the constitution, functions and procedures of, and other
matters relating to, its committees. Until such rules are framed, the State
Assembly shall regulate its procedures on its own.
195. Secretary and Secretariat of State Assembly: (1) The Chief of State shall
appoint the Secretary of the State Assembly on recommendation of the Speaker
of State Assembly.
There shall be a Secretariat for conducting and managing the
business of the State Assembly. The establishment of such Secretariat and
other matters related thereto shall be as provided for in the State law.
The qualification, functions, duties, powers and other conditions
of service of the Secretary of the State Assembly shall be as provided for in the
State law.
196. Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the State Assembly shall be as provided for in the State law, and as
specified by the State Government until such law is made.

Part-15
State Legislative Procedures
197. Legislative powers of State Assembly: The legislative powers of the State
Assembly shall be as contained in lists of Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and
Schedule-9.
198. Procedures for introduction of Bills in State Assembly: (1) A Bill may, subject
to this Constitution, be introduced in the State Assembly.
A Money Bill and a Bill concerning peace and security may be
introduced only as a Government Bill.
"Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or all of the following
subjects:
the imposition, collection, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of taxes in the State,
the preservation of the State Consolidated Fund or any
other State Government Fund, the deposit of moneys into
and the appropriation or the withdrawal of moneys from
such Funds, or the reduction, increment or cancellation of
appropriations or of proposed expenditures from such
Funds,
the regulation of matters relating to the borrowing of
money or the giving of guarantee by the State
Government, or any matter pertaining to the amendment
of the law with respect to any financial obligations
undertaken or to be undertaken by the State Government,
the custody and investment of all revenues received by
any State Government Fund, moneys acquired through the
repayment of loans, and grant moneys; or audits of the
accounts of the State Government, or
other incidental matters directly related to any of the
subjects specified in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d).
Provided that any Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by the
reason only that it provides for the levying of any charges or fees such as
license fee, application fee, renewal fee or for the imposition of fines or
penalty of imprisonment.
If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the
decision of the Speaker of State Assembly thereon shall be final.
199. Procedures for passage of Bills: (1) A Bill passed by the State Assembly shall
be presented to the Chief of State for assent.
If a session of the State Assembly terminates while a Bill is
under consideration, deliberations on the Bill may continue at the succeeding
session.
Provided that if the State Assembly is dissolved or its term expires when
any Bill is under its consideration, such a Bill shall lapse.
200. Withdrawal of Bills: A member who has introduced a Bill may, with the
approval of the State Assembly, withdraw the Bill.
201. Assent on Bills: (1) A Bill which is to be presented to the Chief of State for
assent under Article 199 shall be so presented by the Speaker of State
Assembly after it has been certified by him or her.
Provided that in the case of a Money Bill, the Speaker of State
Assembly shall so certify.
A Bill presented to the Chief of State for his or her assent shall be
assented to within fifteen days, and the State Assembly shall be informed
thereof as soon as possible.
Except for a Money Bill, if the Chief of State is of the opinion
that any Bill needs further deliberations, he or she may send back the Bill with
his or her message to the State Assembly within fifteen days from the date of
presentation of the Bill to him or her.
If any Bill is sent back with his or her message by the Chief of
State under clause (3), it shall be reconsidered by the State Assembly and if the
Bill so reconsidered is again passed as it was or with amendments, and is again
presented to him or her, the Chief of State shall give assent to that Bill within
fifteen days of such presentation.
A Bill shall become an Act after the Chief of State gives assent to
202. Ordinance: (1) If, at any time, except when the State Assembly is in session, a
circumstance exists which renders it necessary to take immediate action, the
Chief of State may, on the recommendation of the State Council of Ministers,
promulgate an Ordinance.
An Ordinance promulgated under clause (1) shall have the same
force and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance:
shall be tabled at the session of the State Assembly held
after the promulgation, and if not passed by the State
Assembly, it shall ipso facto cease to be effective,
may be repealed at any time by the Chief of State, and
shall, unless rendered ineffective or repealed under subclause (a) or (b), ipso facto cease to be effective at the
expiration of sixty days after the day on which a meeting
of the State Assembly is held.

Part -16
State Financial Procedures
203. No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall be levied and
collected in a State except in accordance with law.
No loan shall be raised and guarantee given by the State
Government except as provided for in the Federal law.
204. State Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of trusts (Guthi), all revenues
received by the State Government, all loans raised on the security of revenues,
all moneys received in repayment of any loans made under the authority of any
State Act and any mounts of grants or loans received from the Government of
Nepal shall, except as otherwise provided for in the State Act, be credited to a
State Government Fund to be known as the State Consolidated Fund.
205. Expenditures from State Consolidated Fund or State Government Fund: No
expenditure shall be incurred out of the State Consolidated Fund or any other
State Government Fund except the following:
moneys charged on the State Consolidated Fund,
moneys required to meet the expenditure under an Appropriation
advance moneys authorized by an Act required to meet
expenditures, when an Appropriation Bill is under consideration,
expenditures to be incurred in extraordinary circumstances under
a Vote of Credit Act which contains only a description of
expenditures.
Provided that matters relating to the State Contingency Fund
shall be in accordance with Article 212.
206. Expenditures chargeable on State Consolidated Fund: The expenditures
relating to the following matters shall be charged on the State Consolidated
Fund, and approval of the State Assembly shall not be required for such
expenditures:
the amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
State Speaker and the State Deputy Speaker,
the amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Chairperson and members of the State Public Service
Commission,
all charges relating to debts for which the State Government is
liable,
any sum required to satisfy any judgment or decree made by a
court against the State Government, and
any other sum specified by a State law to be chargeable on the
State Consolidated Fund.
207. Estimates of revenues and expenditures: (1) The State Minister for Finance
shall, in respect of every financial year, lay before the State Assembly an
annual estimate setting out, inter alia, the following matters:
an estimate of revenues,
the moneys required to meet the charges on the State
Consolidated Fund, and
the moneys required to meet the expenditure to be provided for
by a State Appropriation Act.
The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to clause (1) shall also be
accompanied by a statement of the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the
previous financial year and particulars of whether the objectives of the
expenses have been achieved.
208. State Appropriation Act: The moneys required to meet the expenditure to be
provided for by any State Appropriation Act shall be specified under
appropriate heads in an Appropriation Bill.
209. Supplementary estimates: (1) The State Minister for Finance may lay before
the State Assembly a supplementary estimate if it is found in any financial
year,-
that the sum authorized to be spent for a particular service by the
State Appropriation Act for the current financial year is
insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditures upon some
new service not provided for in the State Appropriation Act for
that year, or
that the expenditures made during that financial year are in
excess of the amount authorized by the State Appropriation Act.
The sums included in the supplementary estimates shall be
specified under the heads in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
210. Votes on Account: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Part, a portion of the expenditure estimated for the financial year may, when a
State Appropriation Bill is under consideration, be incurred in advance under a
State Act.
A Vote on Account Bill shall not be introduced until the estimates
of revenues and expenditures have been laid in accordance with Article 207,
and the sums involved in the Vote on Account shall not exceed one-third of the
estimate of expenditures for the financial year.
The expenditures incurred in accordance with the State Vote on
Account Act shall be included in the State Appropriation Bill.
Votes of Credit: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, if
owing to an emergency due to natural causes or other reasons, it appears to be
impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or interest of the State to
specify the details required under clause (1) of Article 207, the State Minister
for Finance may lay before the State Assembly a Vote of Credit Bill giving
only a statement of expenditures.
212. State Contingency Fund: (1) A State Act may create a Fund to be known as the
State Contingency Fund into which shall be paid from time to time such
moneys as may be determined by the State Act.
The Fund under clause (1) shall be under the control of the State
Government. Any unforeseen expenditure may be met out of such Fund by the
State Government.
The amount of the expenditure under clause (2) shall be
reimbursed as soon as possible by the State Act.
213. Act relating to financial procedures: Matters relating to the transfer of moneys
appropriated by the State Act from one head to another and other financial
procedures shall be as provided for in the State Act.

Part-17
Local Executive
214. Executive power of Local Level: (1) The executive power of the Local Level
shall, pursuant to this Constitution and the Federal law, be vested in the Village
Executive or the Municipal Executive.
The local executive power shall be as mentioned in Schedule-8
and Schedule-9.
The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and
regulating the governance of the Village Body and the Municipality shall,
subject to this Constitution and other laws, lie in the Village Executive and the
Municipal Executive.
The executive functions of the Village Body and the Municipality
shall be performed in the name of the Village Executive and the Municipal
Executive.
Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Village
Executive and the Municipal Executive pursuant to clause (4) and other
instruments of authorization pertaining thereto shall be authenticated as
provided for in the Local law.
215. Provisions relating to Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Village Executive:
(1) There shall be a Chairperson of Village Executive in each Village Body.
The Village Executive shall be formed under his or her chairpersonship.
The Village Executive under clause (1) shall consist of one Vice Chairperson, Ward Chairperson elected from each Ward and members elected
pursuant to clause (4).
The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson shall be elected by the
voters residing within the concerned Village Body area by secret ballots on the
basis of one person one vote, in accordance with the first past the post electoral
system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Chairperson" and "Vice Chairperson" mean the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the Village
Executive.
The members of the Village Executive shall also include four
women members elected by the members of the Village Assembly from
amongst themselves and two members elected by the Village Assembly from
the Dalit or minority communities, in possession of the qualification under
clause (5), no later than fifteen days after the final results of the election to the
Village Assembly under Article 222.
A person who has the following qualification shall be qualified to
be elected to the office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward
Chairperson and member:
being a citizen of Nepal,
having completed the age of twenty one years,
being a voter whose name is included in the electoral rolls
of the Village Body,
not being disqualified by any law.
The term of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward
Chairperson and member shall be five years after the date of being elected.
A person who has been elected as the Chairperson for two terms
shall not be eligible to be a candidate in an election to the Village Body.
The office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward
Chairperson or member shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if the Chairperson tenders resignation in writing to the
Vice-Chairperson, and if the Vice-Chairperson tenders
resignation before the Chairperson,
if his or her term of office expires,
if he or she dies.
If the seat falls vacant under clause (7) while the term of office of
the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson still remains for more than one year, the
vacancy shall be filled through by-election for the remainder of term.
216. Provisions relating to Mayor and Deputy Mayor of Municipal Executive: (1)
Each Municipality shall have a Mayor. The Municipal Executive shall be
formed under his or her chairpersonship.
The Municipal Executive under clause (1) shall consist of one
Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson elected from each Ward and members
elected pursuant to clause (4).
The Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall be elected by the voters
residing within the concerned Municipal area by secret ballots on the basis of
one person one vote, in accordance with the first past the post electoral system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Mayor" and "Deputy Mayor"
mean the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor of the Municipal Executive.
The members of the Municipal Executive shall also include five
women members elected by the members of the Municipal Assembly from
amongst themselves and three members elected by the Municipal Assembly
from the Dalit or minority communities, in possession of the qualification
under clause (5), no later than fifteen days after the final results of the election
to the Municipal Assembly under Article 223.
A person who has the following qualification shall be qualified to
be elected to the office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson and
member:
being a citizen of Nepal,
having completed the age of twenty one years,
being a voter whose name is included in the electoral rolls
of the Municipality,
not being disqualified by any law.
The term of office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward
Chairperson and member shall be five years after the date of being elected.
A person who has been elected as the Mayor for two terms shall
not be eligible to be a candidate in an election to the Municipality.
The office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson or
Member shall become vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if the Mayor tenders resignation in writing to the Deputy
Mayor, and if the Deputy Mayor tenders resignation in
writing before the Mayor,
if his or her term of office expires,
if he or she dies.
If the seat falls vacant under clause (8) while the term of office of
the Mayor or Deputy Mayor still remains for more than one year, the vacancy
shall be filled through by-election for the remainder of term.
217. Judicial Committee: (1) There shall be a three-member judicial committee to
be coordinated by its Vice-Chairperson in the case of a Village Body and by its
Deputy Mayor in the case of a Municipality, in order to settle disputes under
their respective jurisdictions in accordance with law.
The judicial committee under clause (1) shall consist of two
members elected by the members of the Village Assembly or the Municipal
Assembly from amongst themselves.
218. Conduct of business of Village Executive and Municipal Executive: Allocation
and conduct of business of the Village Executive and the Municipal Executive
shall be carried out in accordance with the rules approved by the Village
Executive and the Municipal Executive, respectively.
219. Other provisions relating to Local Level Executive: Other provisions relating
to the Local Level Executive, except those contained in this Part, shall be as
provided for in the Federal law, subject to this Constitution.
220. District Assembly and District Coordination Committee: (1) There shall be a
District Assembly to make coordination between the Village Bodies and
Municipalities within the district.
The District Assembly shall consist of Chairpersons and Vice Chairpersons of Village Executives, and Mayors and Deputy Mayors of
Municipal Executives within the district. The first meeting of the District
Assembly shall be held no later than thirty days of the date of final results of
the election to the Village Assemblies and the Municipal Assemblies.
The District Assembly shall elect the District Coordination
Committee consisting of a maximum of nine Members including one Chief,
one Deputy Chief, at least three women and at least one Dalit or minority. The
District Coordination Committee shall discharge all functions required to be
discharged by the District Assembly.
A Member of a Village Assembly or Municipal Assembly within
the concerned district shall be eligible to be a candidate for the office of Chief,
Deputy Chief or Member of the District Coordination Committee. If elected to
the office of Chief, Deputy Chief or Member of the District Coordination
Committee, his or her office of Member of Village Assembly or of Municipal
Assembly shall ipso facto lapse.
The term of office of the Chief, Deputy Chief and member of the
District Coordination Committee shall be five years after the date of being
elected.
The office of the Chief, Deputy Chief and member of the District
Coordination Committee shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if the Chief tenders resignation in writing before the
Deputy Chief, and if the Deputy Chief or member tenders
resignation in writing before the Chief,
if his or her term of office expires,
if he or she dies.
The functions, duties and powers of the District Assembly shall
be as follows:
to make coordination between the Village Bodies and
Municipalities within the district,
to monitor development and construction works to make balance
of such works,
to make coordination between the Federal and the State
Government offices and Village Bodies and Municipalities in the
district,
to perform other functions as provided for in the State law.
Provisions relating to the conduct of the District Assembly,
facilities of Members of the District Coordination Committee and other matters
relating to the District Assembly shall be as provided for in the State law.

Part-18
Local Legislature
221. Legislative powers of Local Level: (1) The legislative powers of the Local
Level shall be vested in the Village Assembly and the Municipal Assembly,
subject to this Constitution.
The legislative powers of the Village Assembly and the
Municipal Assembly shall be as mentioned in the lists contained in Schedule-8
and Schedule-9.
222. Composition of Village Assembly: (1) Each Village Body shall have a Village
Assembly.
A Village Assembly under clause (1) shall consist of the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Village Executive, Ward
Chairpersons, and four members elected from each ward and Members of the
Village Executive elected from Dalit and minority communities pursuant to
clause (4) of Article 215.
A Village Assembly to be formed under clause (1) shall have
representation of at least two women from each ward.
Each ward of a Village Body under the Federal law shall have a
Ward Committee composed of the Ward Chairperson and four members. Such
Ward Chairperson and Ward members shall be elected in accordance with the
first past the post electoral system.
Every person who has completed the age of eighteen years and
whose name is included in the electoral rolls of the Village Body shall have a
right to vote as provided for in the Federal law.
A person who has the following qualification shall be qualified to
become a candidate for the office of the Member of the Village Assembly:
being a citizen of Nepal,
having completed the age of twenty one years,
being his or her name included in the electoral rolls of the
Village Body, and
not being disqualified by any law.
Matters relating to the election to the Village Assembly and other
matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
223. Composition of Municipal Assembly: (1) Each Municipality shall have a
Municipal Assembly.
A Municipal Assembly under clause (1) shall consist of the
Mayor and the Deputy Mayor of the Municipal Executive, Ward Chairpersons,
and four members elected from each Ward and members of the Municipal
Executive elected from Dalit or minority communities pursuant to clause (4) of

Article 216.
A Municipal Assembly to be formed under clause (1) shall have
representation of at least two women from each Ward.
Each ward of a Municipality shall have a Ward Committee
composed of one Ward Chairperson and four members as provided for in the
Federal law. Such Ward Chairperson and Ward members shall be elected in
accordance with the first past the post electoral system.
Every person who has completed the age of eighteen years and
whose name is included in the electoral rolls of the Municipality shall have a
right to vote as provided for in the Federal law.
A person who has the following qualification shall be qualified to
be a candidate for the office of member of the Municipal Assembly:
being a citizen of Nepal,
having completed the age of twenty one years,
being his or her name included in the electoral rolls of the
Municipality, and
not being disqualified by any law.
Matters relating to the election to the Municipal Assembly and
other matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
224. Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Village Assembly and Municipal
Assembly: The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of a Village Executive and
the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Executive shall ipso facto be the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Village Assembly and the Municipal
Assembly, respectively, and perform functions as such.
225. Term of Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly: The term of a Village
Assembly and of a Municipal Assembly shall be five years for the date of
election. Another Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly shall be elected
not later than six months of the expiration of such a term.
226. Powers to make law: (1) A Village Assembly and a Municipal Assembly may
make necessary laws on the matters set forth in the Lists contained in
Schedule-8 and Schedule-9.
The process for making laws under clause (1) shall be as
provided for in the State Law.
227. Other provisions relating to Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly: Other
matters relating to the conduct of business of a Village Assembly and
Municipal Assembly, rules of procedures of meetings, formation of
committees, conditions in which the office of member falls vacant, facilities
receivable by members of the Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly and
employees and offices of the Village Body and Municipality shall be as
provided for in the State law.

Part-19
Local Financial Procedures
228. No tax to be levied or loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall be levied and collected
and no loan raised in the Local level except in accordance with law.
The Local level may levy tax by law on matters falling within its
domain without prejudice to national economic policies, carriage of goods and
services, capital and labour market, and the neighbouring State or Local level.
229. Local Consolidated Fund: (1) Each Village Body and Municipality under the
Local Level shall have one Local Consolidate Fund. All revenues received by
the Village Body or Municipality, any amounts of grants received from the
Government of Nepal and the State Government, all loans raised by the Village
Body and Municipality, and amounts received from other sources shall be
credited to such a Fund.
Matters relating to expenditures from the Local Consolidated
Fund under clause (1) shall be as provided for in the Local law.
230. Estimates of revenues and expenditures of Village Body and Municipality: (1)
The Village Executive and the Municipal Executive shall, subject to this
Constitution, lay an estimate of revenues and expenditures of every financial
year before, and have the estimate passed by, the Village Assembly and the
Municipal Assembly, respectively, as provided for in the Local law.
If, in laying an estimate of revenues and expenditures under
clause (1), the Village Executive or Municipal Executive is required to make a
deficit budget, it must purpose also the sources to meet the deficit as provided
for in the Federal law and the State law.

Part-20
Interrelations between Federation, State and Local Level
231. Legislative interrelations between Federation and States: (1) The Federal Law
may be made to be applicable to the whole of, or, if required, to any part of, the
territory of Nepal.
A State law may be made to be applicable to the whole of, or as
required, to any part of the territory of the State.
If two or more States make a request to the Government of Nepal
to make laws on any matter enumerated in Schedule-6, the Federal Parliament
may make necessary laws. Such laws shall be applicable only to the concerned
States.
232. Relations between Federation, State and Local level: (1) The relations between
the Federation, States, and Local level shall be based on the principles of
cooperation, co-existence and coordination.
The Government of Nepal may, pursuant to this Constitution and
the Federal Law, give necessary directions to any State Council of Ministers on
matters of national importance and on matters to be coordinated between the
States, and it shall be the duty of the concerned State Council of Ministers to
abide by such directions.
If any such type of act as may seriously undermine the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality or independence of Nepal is carried
out in any State, the President may, as required, warn such State Council of
Ministers, suspend or dissolve the State Council of Ministers and the State
Assembly for a period not exceeding six months.
Any suspension or dissolution of any State Council of Ministers
and State Assembly made pursuant to clause (3) must get ratified by a two145
thirds majority of the total number of the then members of the Federal
Parliament within thirty five days.
If dissolution made pursuant to clause (3) is ratified by the
Federal Parliament, election to the State Assembly shall be held in such State
within six months.
Provided that such suspension or dissolution shall ipso facto be invalid
if it is not ratified by the Federal Parliament.
The Federal ruling shall apply to such State during the period of
such suspension if the suspension made pursuant to clause (3) is ratified
pursuant to clause (4) and until election to the State Assembly is held pursuant
to clause (5).
During the continuance of the Federal rule, the Federal
Parliament may make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the List
contained in Schedule-6. Such laws shall continue to exist until repealed by
other laws made by the concerned State Assembly.
The Government of Nepal may, directly or through the State
Government, render necessary assistance to, and give necessary directives to,
any Village Executive or Municipal Executive, pursuant to this Constitution
and the Federal law. It shall be the duty of the Village Executive or Municipal
Executive to abide by such directives.
233. Relations between States: (1) One State shall render assistance in the execution
of legal provisions or judicial and administrative decisions or orders of another
State.
A State may exchange information and consult with another State
on matters of common concern and interest, coordinate each other on their
activities and legislations and extend mutual assistance.
A State shall, in accordance with its State law, provide equal
security, treatment and facility to residents of another State.
234. Inter-State Council: (1) There shall be an Inter-State Council as follows to
settle political disputes arising between the Federation and a State and between
States:
(a) Prime Minister
- Chairperson
(b) Minister for Home Affairs of the Government of Nepal - Member
(c) Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal - Member
(d) Chief Ministers of the concerned States
- Member
The Inter-State Council may meet as required.
The Inter-State Council may invite to its meeting a Minister of
the Government of Nepal and a Minister of the concerned State who is
responsible for the matter of dispute and a concerned expert.
The rules of procedures of the meeting of the Inter-State Council
shall be as determined by the Council itself.
235. Coordination between Federation, State and Local Level: (1) The Federal
Parliament shall make necessary laws in order to maintain coordination
between the Federation, State and Local level.
The State Assembly may maintain coordination between the
State and Village Bodies or Municipalities and settle political disputes, if any,
that have arisen, in coordination with the concerned Village Body,
Municipality and the District Coordination Committee.
The processes and procedures for the settlement of disputes
under clause (2) shall be as provided for in the State law.
236. Inter-State trade: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Constitution, it is prohibited to make any kind of obstruction to the carriage of
goods or extension of services by a State or Local level to another State or
Local level or to the carriage of goods or extension of services to any State or
Local Level or to levy tax, fee or charge thereon or to make any kind of
discrimination on the carriage or extension of such services or goods.
237. Not to affect jurisdiction of Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court: Nothing
contained in this Part shall affect the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Bench of
the Supreme Court under Article 137.

Part-21
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
238. Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority: (1) There shall be a
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority of Nepal, consisting of
the Chief Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief
Commissioner shall act as the Chairperson of the Commission for the
Investigation of Abuse of Authority.
The President shall, on recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.
The term of office of the Chief Commissioner and
Commissioners shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chief Commissioner or a Commissioner shall be vacant in any of the
following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chief Commissioner and Commissioners appointed under
clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed to the office of Chief
Commissioner, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief
Commissioner, his or her term of office shall be so computed as to include his
or her term as the Commissioner.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chief
Commissioner or a Commissioner of the Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority if he or she possesses the following qualification:
holding a bachelor's degree from a recognized university,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
having gained at least twenty years of experiences in the
field of either accounting, revenue, engineering, law,
development or research and being a distinguished person,
having attained the age of forty five years, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners shall be as provided for in the Federal
law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chief Commissioner
and the Commissioners shall not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their
disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner shall not be eligible for appointment in other government
service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
239. Functions, duties and powers of the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse
of Authority: (1) The Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
may, in accordance with law, conduct, or cause to be conducted, investigations
of any abuse of authority committed through corruption by any person holding
public office.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any official in relation to
whom this Constitution itself separately provides for such action and to any
official in relation to whom other law provides for a separate special provision.
In the case of the persons who can be removed from office by
passing a motion of impeachment under Article 101, the Judges who can be
removed by the Judicial Council and the persons who are liable to action under
the Army Act, it may conduct, or cause to be conducted, investigations in
accordance with the Federal law after they have been removed from office.
If the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
finds, on investigation conducted pursuant to clause (1) or (2), that a person
holding public office has committed an act which is defined by law as
corruption, it may file, or cause to be filed, a case against that person and other
person involved in that offense in the competent court in accordance with law.
If, on investigation conducted pursuant to clause (1) or (2), any
act or action done or taken by a person holding public office appears to be of
such nature as to be falling under the jurisdiction of another official or body,
the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority may write to the
concerned official or body for necessary action.
The Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority may
delegate any of its functions, duties and powers on the conducting of
investigations or filing cases, to the Chief Commissioner, a Commissioner or
an officer employee of the Government of Nepal to be exercised and complied
with subject to the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority shall be as provided
for in the Federal law.

Part-22
Auditor General
240. Auditor General: (1) There shall be an Auditor General of Nepal.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Auditor General.
The term of office of the Auditor General shall be six years from
the date of appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Auditor General shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Auditor General appointed under clause (2) shall not be
eligible for reappointment.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Auditor General
if he or she possesses the following qualification:
having served in the Special Class of the Government of
Nepal or having at least twenty years of experiences in
audit related work, after having obtained a bachelor's
degree in management, commerce or accounting from a
recognized university or having passed a chartered
accountancy examination,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
having attained the age of forty five years, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and conditions of service of the Auditor
General shall be as provided for in the Federal law. The remuneration and
conditions of service of the Auditor General shall not, so long as he or she
holds office, be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Auditor General shall not be
eligible for appointment in another government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
241. Functions, duties and powers of Auditor-General: (1) The accounts of all
Federal and State Government Offices including the Office of the President,
Office of the Vice-President, Supreme Court, Federal Parliament, State
Assembly, State Government, Local level, Constitutional Bodies and Offices
thereof, Courts, Office of the Attorney General, Nepal Army, Nepal Police and
Armed Police Force, Nepal shall be audited by the Auditor-General in
accordance with law, having regard to, inter alia, the regularity, economy,
efficiency, effectiveness and the propriety thereof.
The Auditor General shall be consulted in the matter of
appointment of an auditor to carry out the audit of a corporate body of which
the Government of Nepal or State Government owns more than fifty percent of
the shares or assets. The Auditor General may also issue necessary directives
setting forth the principles for carrying out the audit of such corporate body.
The Auditor General shall, at all times, have power to examine
any books of accounts for the purpose of carrying out the functions under
clause (1). It shall be the duty of the concerned chief of office to provide all
such documents and information as may be demanded by the Auditor General
or any of his or her employees.
The accounts to be audited pursuant to clause (1) shall be
maintained in the form prescribed by the Auditor General, as provided for in
the Federal law.
In addition to the accounts of the offices mentioned in clause (1),
the Federal law may also require the accounts of any other offices or bodies to
be audited by the Auditor General.

Part -23
Public Service Commission
242. Public Service Commission: (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission
of Nepal, consisting of the Chairperson and four other Members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and Members.
At least fifty percent of the total number of Members of the
Public Service Commission shall be appointed from amongst the persons who
have worked for twenty or more in any government service, and the rest of the
Members shall be appointed from amongst the persons who hold reputation
after having done research, investigation, teaching or any other significant
work in the field of science, technology, art, literature, law, public
administration, sociology or other sphere of national life.
The term of office of the Chairperson and Members of the Public
Service Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
The Chairperson and Members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a Member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the Member.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), the office of
the Chairperson or a Member of the Public Service Commission shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the Public Service Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
holding a master's degree from a recognized university,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
having attained the age of forty five years, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and the members of the Public Service Commission shall be as
provided for in the Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service of
the Chairperson and the Members of the Public Service Commission shall not,
so long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson and the members of
the Public Service Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other
government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
243. Functions, duties and powers of the Public Service Commission: (1) It shall be
the duty of the Public Service Commission to conduct examinations for the
selection of suitable candidates to be appointed to the positions in the Civil
Service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "positions in the Civil
Service" means all positions in the services of the Government of Nepal, other
than the positions in the services of Army personnel, Nepal Police or Armed
Police Force, Nepal and such other positions in the services as are excluded by
an Act from the Civil Service.
Public
Service
Commission
shall
conduct
written
examinations to be given for appointment to the offices of the Nepal Army,
Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal, other Federal governmental services
and of bodies corporate, other than the positions in the Civil Service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "body corporate" means a
corporation, company, bank or board of which more than fifty percent or more
of the shares or assets is owned or controlled by the Government of Nepal,
except a university or Education Service Commission, or a commission,
corporation, authority, body, academy, board, centre, council and other body
corporate of similar nature established under the Federal law or formed by the
Government of Nepal.
The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the general
principles to be followed in the course of making appointment and promotion
to any position of the Nepal army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal
and other Federal government services.
The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the laws
relating to the conditions of service of the employees in the service of a body
corporate and on the general principles to be followed in the course of making
promotion to any position of such service and taking departmental action
against any such employee.
No permanent appointment to any pensionable position
chargeable on the Government of Nepal shall be made except in consultation
with the Public Service Commission.
The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the
following subjects:
matters concerning the law relating to the conditions of
service of the Federal Civil Service;
the principles to be followed in making appointments to,
promotions to, the Federal Civil Service or positions thereof
and taking departmental action;
matters concerning the suitability of any candidate for
appointment to the Federal Civil Service position for a period
of more than six months;
matters concerning the suitability of any candidate for
transfer or promotion from a position in one type of Federal
Civil Service to a position in other type of Federal Civil
Service or transfer or promotion from other government
service to the Federal Civil Service or for a change in service
or transfer from a position in a State Civil Service to a
position in the Federal Civil Service or from a position in the
Federal Civil Service to a State Civil Service,
matters concerning the permanent transfer or promotion of an
employee working in any position which does not require
consultation with the Public Service Commission to any
position which requires consultation with the Public Service
Commission; and
matters relating to departmental action against any employee
of the Federal Civil Service.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (6), matters falling
within the jurisdiction of the Judicial Service Commission under Article 154
shall be governed by that Article.
The Public Service Commission may so delegate any of its
functions, duties and powers to its Chairperson or Member, an employee of the
Government of Nepal as to be exercised and complied with subject to the
specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
Public Service Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
244. Provisions relating to State Public Service Commission: (1) Each State shall
have a State Public Service Commission.
The functions, duties and powers of the State Public Service
Commission shall be as provided for in the State law.
The Federal Parliament shall by law determine grounds and
standards for the purposes of clause (2).

Part-24
Election Commission
245. Election Commission: (1) There shall be an Election Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chief Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief
Commissioner shall act as the chairperson of the Election Commission.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chief Election Commissioner and Commissioners.
The term of office of the Chief Election Commissioner and
Commissioners of the Election Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chief Election Commissioner or Election Commissioner shall be vacant in
any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chief Election Commissioner and Commissioners appointed
under clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed to the office of Chief
Election Commissioner, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief
Election Commissioner, his or her term of office shall be so computed as to
include his or her term as the Commissioner.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chief Election
Commissioner or an Election Commissioner if he or she possesses the
following qualification:
holding a bachelor's degree from a recognized university,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
having attained the age of forty five years, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief
Election Commissioner and Election Commissioners shall be as provided for in
the Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chief
Election Commissioner and the Commissioners shall not, so long as they hold
office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chief Election Commissioner
and a Commissioner of the Election Commission shall not be eligible for
appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
246. Functions, duties and powers of the Election Commission: (1) The Election
Commission shall, subject to this Constitution and the Federal law, conduct,
supervise, direct and control the election to the President, Vice-President,
members of the Federal Parliament, members of State Assemblies and
members of Local level. For these purposes, the Election Commission shall
prepare electoral rolls.
The Election Commission shall hold a referendum on a matter of
national importance pursuant to this Constitution and the Federal law
If, after nomination of candidacy for the President, Vice President, member of the Federal Parliament, member of State Assemblies or
member of Local level has been filed but before the election results are
declared, a question arises about the qualification of a candidate, the Election
Commission shall decide that question.
The Election Commission may so delegate any of its functions,
duties and powers to the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner
or any government employee as to be exercised and complied with subject to
the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
Election Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
247. To provide necessary assistance to Election Commission: The Government of
Nepal, State Government and Local Government shall provide such employees
and other assistance to the Election Commission as may be required to perform
its functions pursuant to this Constitution.

Part-25
National Human Rights Commission
248. National Human Rights Commission: (1) There shall be a National Human
Rights Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other
members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
National Human Rights Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
The Chairperson and members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the Member.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chairperson or member of the National Human Rights Commission shall
be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the National Human Rights Commission if he or she possesses the
following qualification:
in the case of the Chairperson, being a retired Chief Justice or
retired Judge of the Supreme Court and having rendered
outstanding contribution to the protection and promotion of
human rights or being a renowned person having been active for
at least twenty years in and rendered outstanding contribution to
the protection and promotion of human rights or to various fields
of national life,
in the case of a Member, being a person being involved in the
field of the protection and promotion of human rights or rights
and interests of the child or being a renowned person having been
active for at least twenty years in and rendered outstanding
contribution to various fields of national life,
holding a bachelor's degree from a recognized university,
having attained the age of forty five years,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the National Human Rights Commission shall be
as provided for in the Federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service
of the Chairperson and members of the National Human Rights Commission
shall not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
National Human Rights Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in
other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
249. Functions, duties and powers of National Human Rights Commission: (1) It
shall be the duty of the National Human Rights Commission to respect, protect
and promote human rights and ensure effective enforcement thereof.
For the accomplishment of the duty mentioned in clause (1), the
National Human Rights Commission shall perform the following functions:
to inquire, on its own initiative or on petition or complaint
presented in or sent to the Commission by a victim or any person
on his or her behalf or on information received by the
Commission from any source, into and investigate complaints of
violations of human rights of an individual or group or abetment
thereof, and make recommendation for action against the
perpetrators,
if any official who has the responsibility or duty to prevent
violations of human rights fails to fulfill or perform his or her
responsibility or duty or shows reluctance in the fulfillment or
performance of his or her responsibility or duty, to make
recommendation to the concerned authority to take departmental
action against such official,
if it is required to institute a case against any person or
organization who has violated human rights, to make
recommendation to file a case in the court in accordance with
to coordinate and collaborate with the civil society in order to
enhance awareness on human rights,
to make recommendation, accompanied by the reasons and
grounds, to the concerned body for taking departmental action
against and imposing punishment on those who have violated
human rights,
to carry out periodic reviews of the relevant laws relating to
human rights and make recommendation to the Government of
Nepal for necessary improvements in and amendments to such
laws,
if Nepal has to become a party to any international treaty or
agreement on human rights, to make recommendation,
accompanied by the reasons therefor, to the Government of
Nepal; and monitor whether any such treaty or agreement to
which Nepal is already a party has been implemented, and if it is
found not to have been implemented, to make recommendation
to the Government of Nepal for its implementation,
to publish, in accordance with law, the names of the officials,
persons or bodies who have failed to observe or implement any
recommendations or directives made or given by the National
Human Rights Commission in relation to the violations of human
rights, and record them as violators of human rights.
In discharging its functions or performing its duties, the National
Human Rights Commission may exercise the following powers:
to exercise all such powers as of a court in respect of the
summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person before
the Commission and seeking and recording his or her information
or statements or depositions, examining evidence and producing
exhibits and proofs,
on receipt of information by the Commission in any manner that
a serious violation of human rights has already been committed
or is going to be committed, to search any person or his or her
residence or office, enter such residence or office without notice,
and, in the course of making such search, take possession of any
document, evidence or proof related with the violation of human
rights,
in the event of necessity to take action immediately on receipt of
information that the human rights of any person are being
violated, to enter any government office or any other place
without notice and rescue such person,
to order for the provision of compensation in accordance with
law to any person who is a victim of the violations of human
rights;
The National Human Rights Commission may so delegate any of
its functions, duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of
its Members or a government employee as to be exercised and complied with
subject to the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
National Human Rights Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal

Part-26
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission
250. National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission: (1) There shall be a
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission of Nepal, consisting of a
maximum of five members including a Chairperson.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Natural
Resources and Fiscal Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall be six years from the
date of appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chairperson or member of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chairperson and members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission if he or she
possesses the following qualification:
having gained expertise upon being active for at least twenty
years in the field of natural resources or fiscal management,
economics, law, management, after holding a bachelor's degree in
the relevant subject from a recognized university,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment,
having attained the age of forty five years,
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and other conditions of service of the
Chairperson and members of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law, and their remuneration
and conditions of service shall not, so long as they hold office, be altered to
their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall not be eligible for
appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
251. Functions, duties and powers of National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission: (1) The functions, duties and powers of the National Natural
Resources and Fiscal Commission shall be as follows:
to determine detailed basis and modality for the distribution of
revenues between the Federal, State and Local Governments out
of the Federal Consolidated Fund in accordance with the
Constitution and law,
to make recommendation about equalization grants to be
provided to the State and Local Governments out of the Federal
Consolidated Fund,
to conduct study and research work and prepare parameters as to
conditional grants to be provided to the State and Local
Governments in accordance with national policies and programs,
norms/standards and situation of infrastructures,
to determine detailed basis and modality for the distribution of
revenues between the State and Local Governments out of the
State Consolidated Fund,
to recommend measures to meet expenditures of the Federal,
State and Local Governments, and to reform revenue collection,
to analyze macro-economic indicators and recommend ceiling of
internal loans that the Federal, State and Local Governments can
borrow,
to review the bases for the distribution between the Federal and
State Governments of revenues and recommend for revision,
to set bases for the determination of shares of the Government of
Nepal, State Government and Local level in investments and
returns, in the mobilization of natural resources,
to do study and research work on possible disputes that may arise
between the Federation and the States, between States, between a
State and a Local level, and between Local levels, and make
suggestions to act in a coordinated manner for the prevention of
such disputes.
The National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall
carry out necessary study and research work about environmental impact
assessment required in the course of distribution of natural resources, and make
recommendations to the Government of Nepal.
Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission, detailed bases required to
be followed in the mobilization of natural resources or distribution of revenues,
and other matters including conditions of service of the officials of the
Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

Part-27
Other Commissions
252. National Women Commission: (1) There shall be a National Women
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Women
Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
National Women Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chairperson or member of the National Women Commission shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chairperson and members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the National Women Commission if he or she possesses the
following qualification:
being a woman having rendered outstanding contribution, for at
least ten years, to the field of rights and interests of women or
gender justice or women development or human rights and law,
in the case of the Chairperson, holding a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,
having attained the age of forty five years,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and members of the National Women Commission shall be as provided for in
the Federal law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so
long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
National Women Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other
government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
253. Functions, duties and powers of National Women Commission: (1) The
functions, duties and powers of the National Women Commission shall be as
follows:
(a) to formulate policies and programs concerning the rights and
interests of the women and submit them to the Government of Nepal
for implementation.
(b) to monitor as to whether laws concerning the rights and interests of
the women and obligations under the international treaties to which
Nepal is a party have been implemented, and make suggestions,
accompanied by the measures for their effective compliance and
implementation to the Government of Nepal,
(c) in order to have the women included in the mainstream of national
development and ensure proportional participation in all organs of
the State, to assess, monitor and evaluate the existing policies and
programs, and make recommendation to the Government of Nepal
for their effective implementation,
(d) to carry out study and research work on the legal provisions relating
to gender equality, empowerment of women and women, make
recommendations to the concerned bodies on reforms to be made on
such laws, and monitor the same.
(e) to make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about the
preparation of reports to be submitted by Nepal in accordance with
the provisions contained in the international treaties or agreements
concerning women's rights, to which Nepal is a party,
if it is necessary to file cases against any persons or bodies on
matters of violence against women or being subjected to social illpractices or infringement of or deprivation of enjoyment of women's
rights, to make recommendations to the concerned bodies to file
such cases in courts in accordance with the law.
The National Women Commission may so delegate any of its
functions, duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its
members or any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and
complied with subject to the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of
the National Women Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
254. Powers to establish offices in States: The National Women Rights Commission
may, as required, establish its offices in States.
255. National Dalit Commission: (1) There shall be a National Dalit Commission of
Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Dalit
Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
National Dalit Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chairperson or member of the National Dalit Commission shall be vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chairperson and members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the National Dalit Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
being a person having rendered outstanding contribution to the
field of rights and interests of the Dalit community or human
rights and law, for at least ten years,
in the case of the Chairperson, holding at least a bachelor's
degree from a recognized university,
having attained the age of forty five years,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and members of the National Dalit Commission shall be as provided for in the
Federal law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so long
as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
National Dalit Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other
government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
256. Functions, duties and powers of National Dalit Commission: (1) The functions,
duties and powers of the National Dalit Commission shall be as follows:
(a) to conduct study and exploration as to the overall situation of the
Dalit community, identify areas of necessary policy, legal and
institutional reforms in that field, and make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal,
(b) to formulate national policies and programs concerning the interests
of the Dalit for the upliftment and development of the Dalit, putting
an end to caste-based discrimination, oppression and discrimination,
and submit such policies and programs to the Government of Nepal
for their implementation,
(c) to monitor as to whether laws concerning the interests of the Dalit,
including the special provisions made for the upliftment and interests
of the Dalit community have been effectively implemented, and in
the event of absence of observance or implementation, to make
suggestions to the Government of Nepal for the observance or
implementation thereof,
(d) to make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about the
preparation of reports to be submitted by Nepal in accordance with
the provisions contained in the international treaties or agreements
concerning the rights of the Dalit community, to which Nepal is a
party,
(e) in order to have the Dalit community included in the mainstream of
national development and ensure proportional participation in all
organs of the State, to assess, monitor and evaluate the existing
policies and programs, and make recommendation to the
Government of Nepal for their effective implementation,
if it is necessary to file cases against any persons or bodies on
matters of being victims of caste-based discrimination and
untouchability or social ill-practices or infringement of or
deprivation of enjoyment of the rights of the Dalit, to make
recommendations to the concerned bodies to file such cases in courts
in accordance with the law.
The National Dalit Commission may so delegate any of its
functions, duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its
members or any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and
complied with subject to the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of
the National Dalit Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
257. Powers to establish offices in States: The National Dalit Commission may, as
required, establish its offices in States.
258. National Inclusion Commission: (1) There shall be a National Inclusion
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Inclusion
Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
National Inclusion Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of
the Chairperson or member of the National Inclusion Commission shall be
vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
if a motion of impeachment is passed against him or her
under Article 101,
if he or she is removed from office by the President on
recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds
of his or her inability to hold office and discharge the
functions due to physical or mental illness,
if he or she dies.
The Chairperson and members appointed under clause (2) shall
not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson,
and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of
office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a
member of the National Inclusion Commission if he or she possesses the
following qualification:
being a person having rendered outstanding contribution, for at
least ten years, to the field of social inclusion, rights and interests
or development of persons with disabilities, minority and
marginalized communities and backward areas and classes or
human rights,
in the case of the Chairperson, holding a bachelor's degree from a
recognized university,
having attained the age of forty five years,
not being a member of any political party at the time of
appointment, and
being of high moral character.
The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson
and members of the National Inclusion Commission shall be as provided for in
the Federal law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so
long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of
emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the
National Inclusion Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other
government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the
appointment to any political position or to any position which has the
responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or
to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or
recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
259. Functions, duties and powers of National Inclusion Commission: (1) The
functions, duties and powers of the National Inclusion Commission shall be as
follows:
(a) to conduct study and research works for the protection of the rights
and interests of the communities, including Khas Arya, Pichhada
class, persons with disabilities, senior citizens, labours, peasants,
minorities and marginalized community, backward class, people of
Karnali and the indigent class,
(b) to study the status of implementation of the policies and laws
adopted by the Government of Nepal for the inclusion of the
community, class and region mentioned in clause (a) and make
suggestions to the Government for reforms,
(c) to study as to whether there has been appropriate representation of
the community, class and region mentioned in clause (a) in the
organs of the State and make suggestions to the Government of
Nepal to review the special provisions made for the representation of
such community, class and region,
(d) to study as to whether the protection, empowerment and
development of the community, class and region mentioned in
clause (a) has been satisfactory and make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal about policies to be pursued in the future,
(e) to make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about policies and
programs to be pursued for the development and prosperity of the
Karnali and backward regions,
to make recommendations for timely revisions of laws concerning
minority and marginalized communities,
(g) to monitor the status of implementation of rights and interests
guaranteed for minority and marginalized communities and make
recommendations for revision upon necessary review on the basis of
periodic national census and human development index.
The National Inclusion Commission may so delegate any of its
functions, duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its
members or any employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and
complied with subject to the specified conditions.
Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of
the National Inclusion Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
260. Powers to establish offices in States: The National Inclusion Rights
Commission may, as required, establish its offices in States.
261. Indigenous Nationalities Commission: (1) There shall be an Indigenous
Nationalities Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and a
maximum of four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the Indigenous Nationalities
Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
Indigenous Nationalities Commission shall be six years from the date of
appointment.
Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and
members of the Indigenous Nationalities Commission, circumstances in which
their offices fall vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the
functions, duties and powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the
Federal law.
262. Madhesi Commission: (1) There shall be a Madhesi Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chairperson and a maximum of four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the Madhesi Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
Madhesi Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and
members of the Madhesi Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall
vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties
and powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
263. Tharu Commission: (1) There shall be a Tharu Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chairperson and a maximum of four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the Tharu Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Tharu
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and
members of the Tharu Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall
vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties
and powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
264. Muslim Commission: (1) There shall be a Muslim Commission of Nepal,
consisting of a Chairperson and a maximum of four other members.
The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional
Council, appoint the Chairperson and members of the Muslim Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
Muslim Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and
members of the Muslim Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall
vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties
and powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
265. Review of Commissions: The Federal Parliament shall, after ten years of the
commencement of this Constitution, review the Commissions formed under
this Part.

Part-28
Provisions Relating to National Security
266. National Security Council: (1) There shall be a National Security Council for
making recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers for
the formulation of a policy on overall national interest, security and defence of
Nepal, and for the mobilization and control of the Nepal Army, which shall
consist of the following as the Chairperson and members:
The Prime Minister
-Chairperson
Minister for Defence, Government of Nepal
-Member
Minister for Home, Government of Nepal
-Member
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Government of Nepal -Member
Minister for Finance, Government of Nepal
-Member
Chief Secretary of Government of Nepal
-Member
Commander-in-Chief, Nepal Army
-Member
The secretary at the Ministry of Defence shall act as the member
secretary of the National Security Council.
The National Security Council shall submit its annual report to
the President, and the President shall cause the report to be laid through the
Prime Minister before the Federal Parliament.
Other matters relating to the National Security Council shall be
as provided by the Federal law.
267. Provisions relating to Nepal Army: (1) There shall be an organization of the
Nepal Army in Nepal, which is inclusive and committed to this Constitution,
for the safeguarding of independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of Nepal.
The President shall be the supreme commander-in-chief of the
Nepal Army.
Entry of women, Dalit, indigenous people, indigenous
nationalities, Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu, Pichhada class and backward region
citizens into the Nepal Army shall, on the basis of principles of equality and
inclusion, be ensured by the Federal law.
The Government of Nepal may also mobilize the Nepal Army in
other works including development, construction and disaster management
works, as provided for in the Federal law.
The President shall, on recommendation of the Council of
Ministers, appoint the Commander-in-Chief and remove him or her from
office.
The President shall, on recommendation of the National Security
Council and pursuant to a decision of the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers, declare the mobilization of the Nepal Army in cases where a grave
emergency arises in regard to the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Nepal or
the security of any part thereof, by war, external aggression, armed rebellion or
extreme economic disarray. A declaration of the mobilization of the Nepal
Army must be ratified by the House of Representatives within one month after
the date of such declaration.
Other matters pertaining to the Nepal Army shall be in
accordance with law.
268. Provisions Relating to Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal and National
Investigation Department: (1) The Federation shall have Nepal Police, Armed
Police Force, Nepal and National Investigation Department.
Each State shall have a State police organization.
Matters relating to the Operation, supervision and coordination of
functions to be discharged by the Nepal Police and the State police shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
Other matters relating to the Nepal Police, Armed Police Force,
Nepal and National Investigation Department shall be as provided by the
Federal law.

Part-29
Provisions Relating to Political Parties
269. Formation, registration and operation of political parties: (1) Persons who are
committed to common political ideology, philosophy and program may,
subject to laws made under sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of Article 17, form and
operate political parties, and generate, or cause to be generated, publicity in
order to secure support and cooperation from the general public for their
ideology, philosophy and program or carry out other necessary activity for this
purpose.
A political party formed in accordance with clause (1) must
register the party with the Election Commission upon fulfilment of the
procedures established by law.
A petition to be made for the purpose of registration of a party in
accordance with clause (2) must be accompanied by the constitution and
manifesto of the concerned political party and such other documents as
required by the Federal law.
For a petition to be made for the registration of a party in
accordance with clause (2), the political party must fulfil the following
conditions:
its constitution and rules must be democratic,
its constitution must provide for election of each of the officebearers of the party at the Federal and State levels at least once in
every five years;
provided that nothing shall bar the making of provision by the
constitution of a political party to hold such election within six
months in the event of failure to hold election of its officebearers within five years because of a special circumstance.
there must be a provision of such inclusive representation in its
executive committees at various levels as may be reflecting the
diversity of Nepal.
If the name, objective, insignia or flag of a political party is of
such a nature as to jeopardize the religious and communal unity of the country
or to fragment the country, that party shall not be registered.
270. Prohibition on imposition of restrictions on political parties: (1) Any law,
arrangement or decision so made as to impose any restriction on the formation
and operation of a political party and on the generation of publicity in order to
secure support and cooperation from the general public for the ideology,
philosophy and program of the party in accordance with Article 269 shall be
deemed to be inconsistent with this Constitution and shall, ipso facto, be void.
Any law, arrangement or decision so made as to allow for
participation or involvement of only a single political party or persons having
similar political ideology, philosophy or program in the elections or in the
political system of, or in the conduct of governance of, the country shall be
deemed to be inconsistent with this Constitution and shall, ipso facto, be void.
271. Registration required for securing recognition for the purpose of contesting
elections as political party: (1) Every political party that is registered in
accordance with Article 269 and intends to secure recognition from the
Election Commission for the purposes of elections must be registered with the
Election Commission in fulfilment of the procedures set forth in the Federal
The political party must submit a yearly audit report in addition
to the matters set forth in clause (3) of Article 269 along with an application to
be made for the purpose of clause (1) and also fulfil the terms set forth in clause
(4) of that Article.
272. Other provisions relating to political parties: Provisions relating to the
formation, registration, operation and facilities of political parties and other
matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the Federal law.

Part-30
Emergency Power
273. Emergency power: (1) If a grave emergency arises in regard to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity of Nepal or the security of any part thereof, by war, external
aggression, armed rebellion, extreme economic disarray, natural calamity or
epidemic, the President may declare or order a state of emergency in respect of
the whole of Nepal or of any specified part thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), if there arises
a grave emergency in a State by a natural calamity or epidemic, the concerned
State Government may request the Government of Nepal to declare or order a
state of emergency in respect of the whole of the State or of any specified part
thereof, in accordance with this Article.
Every declaration or order made in accordance with clause (1)
shall be laid before both Houses of the Federal Parliament for approval within
one month after the date of issuance of such proclamation or order.
If a declaration or order laid for approval in accordance with
clause (3) is approved by at least two-thirds majority of the total number of the
then members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, the declaration or
order shall continue in force for a period of three months from the date of its
issuance.
If a declaration or order laid for approval in accordance with
clause (3) is not approved in accordance with clause (3), the declaration or
order shall ipso facto be inoperative.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article,
prior to expiration of the period mentioned in clause (4), a motion to extend the
period of the declaration or order of state of emergency for another period not
exceeding three months may be submitted to the Federal Parliament.
If a motion mentioned in clause (6) is passed by at least twothirds majority of the total number of the then members of both Houses of the
Federal Parliament, the declaration or order shall continue in force for the
period mentioned in that motion.
In the event of dissolution of the House of Representatives, the
powers exercisable by the Federal Parliament in accordance with clauses (3),
(4), (6) and (7) shall be exercised by the National Assembly.
After the making of a declaration or order of a state of
emergency in accordance with clause (1), the President may issue such orders
as are necessary to meet the exigencies. Orders so issued shall apply as of law
so long as the state of emergency is in operation.
At the time of making a declaration or order of a state of
emergency in accordance with clause (1), the fundamental rights as provided in

Part-3 may be suspended until the declaration or order is in operation.
Provided that Article 16, sub-clauses (c) and (d) of clause (2) of Article
17, Article 18, clause (2) of Article 19, Articles 20, 21, 22 and 24, clause (1) of

Article 26, Articles 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, clauses (1) and (2) of Article 36,
Articles 38 and 39, clauses (2) and (3) of Article 40, Articles 41, 42, 43 and 45,
the right to constitutional remedy in relation to such Articles pursuant to

Article 46 and the right to the remedy of habeas corpus shall not be suspended.
If any Article of this Constitution is suspended pursuant to clause
(10), no petition may lie in any court for the enforcement of the fundamental
right conferred by that Article nor may a question be raised in any Court in that
respect.
If, during the continuance of a declaration or order under this
Article, any injury is caused to a person from any act done by any official in
bad faith, the victim may, within three months from the date of termination of
that declaration or order, file a petition for compensation for such injury. If
such petition is made, the court may order for compensation by, and punish,
the perpetrator as provided for in the Federal law.
The President may, at any time, withdraw a declaration or order
of a state of emergency made in accordance with this Article.

Part-31
Amendment to the Constitution
274. Amendment to Constitution: (1) No amendment shall be made to this
Constitution in manner to be prejudicial to the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence of Nepal and sovereignty vested in the people.
Subject to clause (1) and other Articles of this Constitution, a Bill
to amend or repeal any Article of this Constitution may be introduced in either
House of the Federal Parliament.
Provided that clause (1) shall not be amended.
A Bill introduced pursuant to clause (1) shall be publicly
published for information to the general public within thirty days of its
introduction in the concerned House.
If a Bill introduced pursuant to clause (1) is related with the
alteration in the borders of any State or matters set forth in Schedule-6, the
Speaker or the Chairperson of the concerned House must send that Bill to the
State Assembly for its consent, within thirty days after its introduction in the
Federal Parliament.
The concerned State Assembly must, by a majority of the total
number of its the then members, accept or reject the Bill presented for its
consent pursuant to clause (4) and give information thereof to the Federal
Parliament within three months.
Provided that if any State Assembly is not in existence, such Bill must
be either accepted or rejected within three months after the date of holding of
the first meeting following the formation of that State Assembly.
In the event of failure to give information of acceptance or
rejection of such Bill within the period set forth in clause (5), nothing shall
prevent the House of the Federal Parliament in which the Bill was originated
from proceeding with the Bill.
If the State Assembly, by its majority, gives a notice of rejection
of such Bill to the concerned House of the Federal Parliament within the period
under clause (5), the Bill shall be inoperative.
A Bill which does not require the consent of the State Assembly
or a Bill accepted by a majority of the State Assembly under clause (5) must be
passed by at least two-thirds majority of the total number of the then members
of both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
A Bill passed under clause (8) shall be presented to the President
for assent.
The President shall give assent to a Bill presented under clause
(5), within fifteen days from the date of its receipt, and the Constitution shall
get amended from the date of assent.

Part-32
Miscellaneous
275. Provisions relating to referendum: (1) If a decision is made by a two-thirds
majority of the total number of the then members of the Federal Parliament
that it is necessary to hold a referendum with respect to any matter of national
importance, decision on that matter may be taken by way of referendum.
Matters relating to referendum and other relevant matters shall be
as provided for in the Federal law.
276. Pardons: The President may, in accordance with law, grant pardons, suspend,
commute or remit any sentence passed by any Court, judicial or quasi-judicial
body or administrative authority or body.
277. Titles, honours and decorations: (1) The President shall confer titles, honours
and decorations to be conferred on behalf of the State.
No citizen of Nepal may, without the approval of the
Government of Nepal, accept any title, honour or decoration from any foreign
government.
278. Power to make treaties: (1) The Federation shall have the power to make
treaties or agreements.
In making a treaty or agreement on a matter falling within the list
of State power, the Government of Nepal must consult the concerned State.
A State Council of Ministers may, with the consent of the
Government of Nepal, make contractual agreements on financial and industrial
matters.
279. Ratification of, accession to, acceptance of, or approval of, treaties or
agreements: (1) The ratification of, accession to, acceptance of, or approval of,
treaties or agreements to which Nepal or the Government of Nepal is to become
a party shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Any law to be made pursuant to clause (1) shall, inter alia,
require that the ratification of, accession to, acceptance of, or approval of,
treaties or agreements on the following subjects must be made by a majority of
two-thirds of the total number of the then members of both Houses of the
Federal Parliament:
peace and friendship,
defence and strategic alliance,
boundaries of the State of Nepal, and
natural resources, and the distribution of their uses.
Provided that, out of the treaties or agreements under sub-clauses (a)
and (d), if any treaty or agreement is of an ordinary nature, which does not
affect the nation extensively, seriously or in the long term, the ratification of,
accession to, acceptance of, or approval of, such treaty or agreement may be
made by a simple majority of the members present in a meeting of the House
of Representatives.
After the commencement of this Constitution, unless a treaty or
agreement is ratified, acceded to, accepted or approved in accordance with this
Article, such treaty or agreement shall not apply to the Government of Nepal or
Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) and (2), no
treaty or agreement may be concluded in detrimental to the territorial integrity
of Nepal.
280. Special provision relating to discharge of functions of President: If the offices
of both the President and the Vice-President fall vacant in accordance with this
Constitution, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall discharge the
functions required to be performed by the President under this Constitution
until election to the President or Vice-President is held and he or she assumes
office.
281. Appraisal and review of special rights: The Government of Nepal shall make
appraisal and review of the implementation of special rights of the women and
Dalit community and impacts thereof, on the basis of human development
index, concurrently with a national census to be held in every ten years.
282. Ambassadors and special emissaries: (1) The President may, on the basis of the
principle of inclusion, appoint Nepalese ambassadors, and special emissaries
for any specific purposes.
The President shall receive letters of credentials from foreign
ambassadors and diplomatic representatives.
283. Appointments to be made in accordance with inclusive principle: Appointments
to offices of Constitutional Organs and Bodies shall be made in accordance
with the inclusive principle.
284. Provisions relating to Constitutional Council: (1) There shall be a
Constitutional Council for making recommendations for appointment of the
Chief Justice and Chiefs and officials of the Constitutional Bodies in
accordance with this Constitution, which shall consist of the following as the
Chairperson and members:
The Prime Minister
-Chairperson
The Chief Justice
-Member
The Speaker of the House of Representatives
-Member
The Chairperson of the National Assembly
-Member
Leader of Opposition Party in the House of Representatives
-Member
Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives -Member
While making a recommendation for appointment to the office of
the Chief Justice, the Constitutional Council shall include the Minister for Law
and Justice of the Government of Nepal, as its member.
The Constitutional Council must make a recommendation for
appointment under this Constitution before one month of the vacation of the
office of the Chief Justice or a chief or official of a Constitutional Body.
Provided that if such office falls vacant because of death or resignation,
it may so make recommendation for appointment that the office is fulfilled
within one month after the date of vacancy.
Other functions, duties and powers of the Constitutional Council
and rules of procedures on the appointment of the Chief Justice or chiefs or
officials of Constitutional Bodies shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
The Chief Secretary of the Government of Nepal shall act as the
secretary of the Constitutional Council.
285. Constitution of government service: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in
order to run the administration of the country, constitute the Federal civil
service and such other Federal government services as may be required. The
constitution, operation and conditions of service of such services shall be as
provided for in the Federal Act.
Positions in the Federal civil service as well as all Federal
government services shall be filled through competitive examinations, on the
basis of open and proportional inclusive principle.
The State Council of Ministers, Village Executives and
Municipal Executives may by law constitute and operate various government
services as required for the operation of their administration.
286. Election Constituency Delimitation Commission: (1) The Government of
Nepal may constitute an Election Constituency Delimitation Commission, to
determine election constituencies for the purpose of election to the members of
the Federal Parliament and members of the State Assemblies in accordance
with this Constitution, which shall consist of the following as the Chairperson
and members:
Retired Judge of the Supreme Court -Chairperson
One Geographer
-Member
One sociologist or demographer -Member
One administration expert or jurist -Member
Gazetted
special
class
officer
Government of Nepal
-Membersecretary
The term of office of the Election Constituency Delimitation
Commission shall be as prescribed at the time of its constitution.
A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson or
a member of the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission if he or she
possesses the following qualification:
holding at least bachelor’s degree in related subject from a
recognized university,
having attained the age of forty-five years, and
having high moral character.
The office of the Chairperson or a member of the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing,
if he or she is removed by the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers,
if he or she dies.
While determining election constituencies pursuant to this
Article, the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall so determine
the constituencies, having regard to population and geography as the basis of
representation, and as to ensure that the ratio between the geography,
population and number of members of such election constituencies is equal, so
far as practicable.
While delimitating election constituencies pursuant to clause (5),
regard must be had to, inter alia, the density of population, geographical
specificity, administrative and transportation convenience, community and
cultural aspects of the constituencies.
No question may be raised in any court on any matter of the
determination, or review, of election constituencies made by the Election
Constituency Delimitation Commission.
The Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall
submit a report on the works it has performed to the Government of Nepal.
The Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers, shall lay the
report received pursuant to clause (8) before the Federal Parliament and send it
to the Election Commission for implementation.
The Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall
determine its rules of procedures itself.
The remuneration and facilities of the Chairperson and the
members of the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall be
similar to those of the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election
Commissioners of the Election Commission, respectively.
The election constituencies delimited in accordance with clause
(5) must be reviewed in every twenty years.
The Government of Nepal shall provide such employees as may
be required for the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission.
287. Language Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal shall, no later than one
year of the commencement of this Constitution, constitute a Language
Commission comprising representation of States.
The Language Commission shall consist of one Chairperson and
a required number of members.
The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the
Language Commission shall be six years from the date of their appointment.
They may not be reappointed.
A person shall be qualified to be appointed as the Chairperson or
a member of the Language Commission if he or she possesses the following
qualification:
holding master’s degree in related subject from a recognized
university,
having gained at least twenty years of experience in the fields of
study, teaching and research on various languages of Nepal,
having completed the age of forty-five years, and
having high moral character.
The office of the Chairperson or a member of the Language
Commission shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing,
if he or she is removed by the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers,
if he completes the age of sixty five years,
if he or she dies.
The functions, duties and powers of the Language Commission
shall be as follows:
to determine the criteria to be fulfilled for the recognition of the
official language and make recommendations on languages to the
Government of Nepal,
to make recommendations to the Government of Nepal, on the
measures to be adopted for the protection, promotion and
development of languages,
to measure the levels of development of mother tongues and
make suggestions to the Government of Nepal, on the
potentiality of their use in education,
to study, research and monitor languages.
The Language Commission shall complete its task under subclause (a) of clause (6) no later than five years after the date of its constitution.
The Government of Nepal may, in coordination with a State
Government, establish a branch of the Language Commission in that State.
The other functions, duties, powers and rules of procedures of the
Language Commission shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
288. Capital: (1) The capital of Nepal shall be situated in Kathmandu.
The capital of a State under this Constitution shall be as decided
by a two-thirds majority of the number of the then members of the concerned
State Assembly.
The business of a State shall be conducted through the place as
specified by the Government of Nepal until decision is made in accordance
with clause (2).
289. Special provision relating to citizenship of officials: (1) In order for a person to
be elected, nominated or appointed to the office of President, Vice-President,
Prime Minister, Chief Justice, Speaker of the House of Representatives, Chief
of State, Chief Minister, Speaker of a State Assembly and chief of a security
body, the person must have obtained the citizenship of Nepal by descent.
A person who has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by descent, a
person who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal or a person who
has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by birth shall also be qualified for the
office of a constitutional body other than that mentioned in clause (1).
Provided that the person must have resided in Nepal for at least ten
years in the case of a person who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of
Nepal, and for at least five years in the case of a person who has obtained the
citizenship of Nepal by birth or who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of
Nepal in accordance with clause (6) of Article 11.
290. Provisions relating to Guthi (trusts): (1) The Federal Parliament shall make
necessary laws in relation to the rights of the trust and the farmers enjoying
possessory rights over trust lands in a manner not to be prejudicial to the basic
norms of the trusts.
Other matters relating to trusts shall be as provided by the federal
291. Not to be qualified for appointment: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Constitution, a citizen of Nepal who has obtained a foreign
permanent residence permit shall not be qualified for election, nomination or
appointment to an office to be elected, nominated or appointed pursuant to this
Constitution.
Provided that nothing shall prevent electing, nominating or appointing a
person who has renounced such foreign permanent residence permit to such
office after the expiry of a period of at least three months.
Other matters relating to the citizens of Nepal who have obtained
foreign permanent residence permits as mentioned in clause (1) shall be as
provided for in the Federal law.
292. Provisions relating to parliamentary hearings: (1) Parliamentary hearings shall
be conducted as to appointments to the offices of the Chief Justice and Judges
of the Supreme Court, members of the Judicial Council, chiefs and members of
Constitutional Bodies, who are appointed on the recommendation of the
Constitutional Council under this Constitution, and to the offices of
ambassadors, as provided for in the Federal law.
For the purposes of clause (1), there shall be formed a fifteenmember joint committee consisting of members of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, in accordance with the Federal law.
No member of the joint committee under clause (2) shall practice
law in the Supreme Court during that term of the Federal Parliament.
293. Monitoring of functioning of Constitutional Bodies: The chiefs and officials of
the Constitutional Bodies must be accountable and responsible to the Federal
Parliament. The committees of the House of Representatives may monitor and
evaluate the functioning, including reports, of the Constitutional Bodies, other
than the National Human Rights Commission, and give necessary direction or
advice.
294. Annual reports of Constitutional Bodies: (1) Every Constitutional Body under
this Constitution shall submit an annual report of its functioning to the
President, and the President shall cause that report to be laid through the Prime
Minister before the Federal Parliament.
The matters to be set out in the annual report under clause (1)
shall be as provided for in the Federal law.
Notwithstanding
anything
contained
clause
Constitutional Body may prepare a separate report in relation to the
functioning of each State and submit it to the Chief of State.

Part-33
Transitional Provisions
295. Constitution of Federal Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal may
constitute a Federal Commission for making suggestions on matters relating to
the boundaries of States.
The names of the States under clause (3) of Article 56 shall be set
by a two thirds majority of the total number of members of the concerned State
Assemblies.
The Government of Nepal shall constitute a commission for the
determination of the number and boundaries of Village Bodies, Municipalities
and Special, Protected or Autonomous Regions to be formed under clauses (4)
and (5) of Article 56. The commission must determine the number and
boundaries of the Village Bodies, Municipalities and Special, Protected or
Autonomous Regions in accordance with the criteria set by the Government of
Nepal.
The commission under clause (3) shall be constituted no later
than six months of the date of commencement of this Constitution. Its term
shall be one year.
296. Constituent Assembly to be converted into Legislature-Parliament: (1) The
Constituent Assembly existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution shall ipso facto be converted into the Legislature-Parliament after
the commencement of this Constitution, and the term of such Legislature Parliament shall exist until 7 Magha 2074.
Provided that if an election is held to the House of Representatives set
forth in this Constitution prior to the expiration of that term, the Legislature Parliament shall continue to exist until the day before the day specified for the
filing of nominations of candidates for that election.
The Bills under consideration of the Legislature-Parliament at the
time of commencement of this Constitution shall ipso facto be transferred to
the Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1).
The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) shall perform
the business required to be performed by the Federal Parliament in accordance
with this Constitution until election to the House of Representatives is held
pursuant to this Constitution.
The legislative power of the State Assembly with respect of
matters set forth in Schedule-6 shall, upon the commencement of this
Constitution, be vested in the Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1)
until the State Assembly is formed. Any law so made shall be inoperative in
relation to that State after one year of the date of formation of the State
Assembly set forth in this Constitution.
The Legislature-Parliament Secretariat, its Secretary General,
Secretary and employees existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution shall, subject to the conditions of service in force at the time of
their appointment, exist in the Federal Parliament Secretariat set forth in this
Constitution.
Where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess at the time of
commencement of this Constitution, the President shall summon its session no
later than seven days after the date of commencement of this Constitution. The
President shall thereafter summon a session of the Legislature-Parliament from
time to time.
297. Provisions relating to the President and the Vice-President: (1) The President
and the Vice-President existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution shall continue to hold their respective offices until other President
and Vice-President are elected in accordance with this Article.
The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) of Article 296
shall, on the basis of political understanding, elect the President and the Vice President, no later than one month after the date of the commencement of this
Constitution where the Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of
commencement of this Constitution and after the date on which the session is
summoned in accordance with clause (6) of Article 296 where the Legislature Parliament is in recess.
In the event of failure to have an understanding under clause (2),
the President and the Vice-President must be elected by a majority of all the
then members of the Legislature-Parliament.
If the office of the President or Vice-President elected in
accordance with clause (2) or (3) falls vacant for any reason, the President or
Vice-President shall be elected by the Legislature-Parliament in accordance
with this Article until the Federal Parliament is formed.
The term of office of the President or Vice-President elected in
accordance with this Article shall continue to exist until another President or
Vice-President elected by an electoral college set forth in Article 62 assumes
office.
The office of the President or Vice-President elected in
accordance with this Article shall become vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
if the President tenders resignation in writing to the Vice President and the Vice-President, before the President,
if a motion of impeachment against him or her is passed in
accordance with clause (7),
if another President or Vice-President elected by an electoral
college set forth in Article 62 assumes office,
if he or she dies.
At least one fourth of the total number of the then members of
the Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) of Article 296 may move a
motion of impeachment against the President or Vice-President elected in
accordance with this Article on the ground of serious violation of this
Constitution and law. If the motion is passed by at least two thirds majority of
the total number of the then members of the Legislature-Parliament, he or she
shall relive of his or her office
298. Provisions relating to formation of Council of Ministers: (1) The Council of
Ministers existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall
continue to exist until the Council of Ministers set forth in clause (2) is formed.
The Prime Minister shall, on the basis of political understanding,
be elected no later than seven days after the date of the commencement of this
Constitution where the Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of
commencement of this Constitution, and after the date on which the session of
the Legislature-Parliament summoned in accordance with clause (6) of Article
286 commences where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess, and a Council of
Ministers shall be formed under his or her chairpersonship.
In the event of failure to have an understanding under clause (2),
the Prime Minister shall be elected by a majority of all the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament.
The composition and allocation of portfolios of the Council of
Ministers to be formed in accordance with this Article shall be made through
mutual understanding.
The Council of Ministers to be formed in accordance with this
Article shall consist of a Deputy Prime Minister and other Ministers, as
required.
The Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this Article
shall, in appointing Ministers in accordance with clause (5), appoint Ministers
from amongst the members of the Legislature-Parliament, on the
recommendation of the concerned party.
The Prime Minister and other Ministers appointed in accordance
with this Article shall be collectively responsible to the Legislature-Parliament,
and the Ministers shall be individually responsible to the Prime Minister and
the Legislature Parliament for the work of their respective Ministries.
The office of the Prime Minister appointed in accordance with
this Article shall be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
if a vote of no-confidence is passed against him or her or a vote
of confidence is not passed in accordance with clause (14),
if he or she ceases to be a member of the Legislature-Parliament,
if he or she dies.
The office of the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of
State and Assistance Minister appointed in accordance with this Article shall
be vacant in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Prime Minister,
if the Prime Minister is removed from office in accordance with
clause (8),
if he or she is removed from office by the Prime Minister on the
recommendation or advice of the concerned party,
if he or she dies.
Even though the office of the Prime Minister falls vacant under
clause (8), the same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another
Council of Ministers is constituted.
If the Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this Article
dies, the Deputy Prime Minister or senior-most Minister shall act as the Prime
Minister until another Prime Minister is appointed.
The Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this Article
may, whenever he or she considers necessary or appropriate to show/clarify
that he or she has confidence from the Legislature-Parliament, table a
resolution to that effect in the Legislature-Parliament for the vote of
confidence.
(13) At least one-fourth of the total number of the then members of
the Legislature-Parliament may table in writing a motion of no-confidence
against the Prime Minister appointed in accordance with this Article.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not be tabled more than
once in six moths' period against the same Prime Minister appointed in
accordance with this Article.
A motion tabled under clauses (12) and (13) shall be decided by
a majority of the total number of the then members of the Legislature
Parliament.
The Government of Nepal shall, after the commencement of this
Constitution, exercise the powers of a State until the Council of Ministers of
the State set forth in this Constitution is formed.
299. Provisions relating to Speaker and Deputy Speaker: (1) The Speaker and
Deputy Speaker existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution
shall continue to hold their respective offices until another Speaker and Deputy
Speaker is elected pursuant to this Constitution.
The members of the Legislature-Parliament shall, on the basis of
political understanding, elect one Speaker and one Deputy Speaker from
themselves no later than twenty days after the date of the commencement of
this Constitution where the Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time
of commencement of this Constitution, and after the date on which the session
of the Legislature-Parliament is summoned in accordance with clause (6) of

Article 296 where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess.
In the event of failure to have an understanding under clause (2),
a member of the Legislature-Parliament who commands a majority of all the
then members of the Legislature-Parliament shall be deemed to be elected as
the Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
In holding electing in accordance with clause (2) or (3), the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be members representing different
political parties in the Legislature-Parliament.
In discharging his or her functions in accordance with this
Constitution, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall so discharge functions in the
capacity of a neutral person without standing for or against any political party
whatsoever.
The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall become vacant
in any of the following circumstances:
if he or she resigns in writing,
if he or she ceases to be a member of the Legislature-Parliament,
if a resolution is passed by a majority of at least two-thirds of the
total number of the members of the Legislature-Parliament to the
effect that his or her conduct is not compatible with his or her
office,
if he or she dies.
The Deputy Speaker or another member shall preside over a
meeting at which deliberations are to be held on a resolution that the conduct
of the Speaker of the Legislature-Parliament is not compatible with his or her
office, and the Speaker may take part and vote in the deliberations on such
resolution.
Other procedures on the election to the Speaker and Deputy
Speaker and procedures on the moving and passage of a motion that the
Speaker or Deputy Speaker has committed conduct not compatible with his or
her office shall be as provided by the then prevailing rules of the Legislature Parliament.
300. Provisions relating to Judiciary: (1) The Supreme Court, Constituent Assembly
Court, Appellate Courts and District Courts existing at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall continue to exist until the structure of
Judiciary set forth in this Constitution is set up. Nothing in this Constitution
shall be deemed to bar the settlement by respective Courts of the cases already
filed in such Courts prior to the commencement of this Constitution and of the
cases to be filed after the commencement of this Constitution.
The Chief Justice and Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Judges
and Judges of the Appellate Courts and Judges of the Districts Counts shall be
deemed to have been appointed under this Constitution.
The High Courts set forth in Article 139 shall be established no
later than one year after the date of commencement of this Constitution. The
Appellate Courts existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution
shall be dissolved after the establishment of such Courts.
After the establishment of the High Courts in accordance with
clause (3), the cases sub judice in the Appellate Courts shall be transferred to
such High Courts as specified by the Government of Nepal, in consultation
with the Judicial Council, by notification in the Nepal Gazette.
After the establishment of the High Courts in accordance with
clause (3), the Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of the Judicial Council,
post the Chief Judges and Judges of the Appellate Courts who are holding
office at the time of commencement of this Constitution to the offices of the
Chief Judges and Judges of the High Courts.
The Additional Judges of the Appellate Courts who are holding
office at the time of commencement of this Constitution may continue to hold
office until the term specified at the time of their appointment.
The cases on criminal offences punishable by imprisonment for a
term of more than one year and sub judice in any body other than a Court at the
time of commencement of this Constitution shall, after the commencement of
this Constitution, be transferred to the concerned District Court.
301. Provisions relating to Constitutional Bodies and officials thereof: (1) The
Constitutional Bodies which are existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution and provided in this Constitution shall be deemed to have been
formed under this Constitution, and nothing shall be deemed to bar the
settlement of the matters under consideration of such Bodies subject to this
Constitution.
The chiefs or officials of the Constitutional Bodies holding office
at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been
appointed in accordance with this Constitution and shall continue to hold their
respective offices subject to the conditions of services at the time of their
appointments.
The officials holding office in the Commission for the
Investigation of the Abuse of Authority and the Public Service Commission, at
the time of commencement of this Constitution, in excess of the number
specified in this Constitution, shall continue to hold their respective offices
subject to the conditions of services at the time of their appointments.
302. Formation and operation of government services at State and Local levels: (1)
The Government of Nepal shall make necessary provisions for the delivery of
services at the State and Local levels.
The Government of Nepal may, in making provisions under
clause (1), arrange for the delivery of services by making adjustment of the
employees serving in the government services at the time of commencement of
this Constitution with the Federal, State and Local levels in accordance with
303. Provisions relating to Local Bodies: (1) The Local Bodies existing at the time
of Commencement of this Constitution shall continue to exist until the
determination of the number and areas of the Local level in accordance with
this Constitution.
Election to the officials of the Local Bodies existing under clause
(1) shall be held in accordance with law.
The officials of the Local Bodies elected in accordance with
clause (2) shall continue to hold office until election to the Local level is held
in accordance with this Constitution.
304. Existing laws to remain in force: (1) The Nepal laws in force at the time of
commencement of this Constitution shall continue to be in force until such laws
are repealed or amended.
Provided that any law which is inconsistent with this Constitution shall
ipso facto be invalid to the extent of such inconsistency, after one year of the
date on which the first session of the Federal Parliament set forth in this
Constitution is held.
Acts relating to peace process under the Interim Constitution of
Nepal, 2007 (2063) shall be deemed to have been done under this Constitution.
305. Power to remove difficulties: If any difficulty arises in connection with the
implementation of this Constitution until the commencement of the first
session of the Federal Parliament, upon being elected in accordance with this
Constitution, the President may, on the recommendation of the Government of
Nepal, Council of Ministers, issue necessary orders to remove such difficulty;
and such orders must be submitted to the Legislature-Parliament or Federal
Parliament, held immediately after the issue such orders, for approval.

Part-34
Definitions and Interpretations
306. Definitions and interpretations: (1) Unless the subject or the context otherwise
requires, in this Constitution,-
"minorities" means ethnic, linguistic and religious groups whose
population is less than the percentage specified by the Federal
law, and includes groups that have their distinct ethnic, religious
or linguistic characteristics, aspirations to protect such features
and subjected to discrimination and oppression,
"law" means a Federal law, State law and Local law,
"Article" means an article of this Constitution,
"Municipality" means and includes a Municipal Corporation and
Sub-municipal Corporation.
"citizen" means a citizen of Nepal,
"State" means the area and form of a federal unit of Nepal
divided into the Federal units in accordance with this
Constitution,
"remuneration" means and includes salary, allowance, pension
and any other form of emolument and facility,
"state power" means the power relating to the Executive,
Legislative and Judiciary of the state, and includes residual
power.
"Bill" means a draft of amendment to the Constitution or of an
Act which has been introduced in the Federal Parliament or a
State Assembly,
"Federation" means the federal level that is the apex unit of the
federal structure,
"Federal Units" means the Federation, State and Local levels,
"Constitutional Bodies" means the Commission for the
Investigation of Abuse of Authority, Auditor General, Public
Service Commission, Election Commission, National Human
Rights Commission, National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission, National Women Commission, National Dalit
Commission, National Inclusion Commission, Indigenous
Nationalities
Commission,
Madhesi
Commission,
Tharu
Commission and Muslim Commission,
"marginalized" means communities that are made politically,
economically and socially backward, are unable to enjoy services
and facilities because of discrimination and oppression and of
geographical remoteness or deprived thereof and are in lower
status than the human development standards mentioned in
Federal law, and includes highly marginalized groups and groups
on the verge of extinction,
"Local level" means the Village Bodies, Municipalities and
District Assemblies to be established in accordance with this
Constitution.
Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, the legal
provisions relating to interpretation of laws shall, subject to the provisions of
this Constitution, apply to the interpretation of this Constitution in the same
manner as that provisions apply to the interpretation of the Nepal laws.

Part-35
Short Title, Commencement and Repeal
307. Short title and commencement: (1) This Constitution may be cited as the
"Constitution of Nepal".
This Constitution shall commence on 20 September 2015 (3rd
day of the month of Ashwin of the year 2072 Bikram Sambat).
308. Repeal: The Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007 (2063) is hereby repealed.
Schedule-1
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 8)
National Flag of Nepal
The method of making the National Flag of Nepal
Method of making the shape inside the border
On the lower portion of a crimson cloth draw a line AB of the required
length from left to right.
From A draw a line AC perpendicular to AB making AC equal to AB
plus one third AB. From AC mark off D making line AD equal to line
AB. Join B and D.
From BD mark off E making BE equal to AB.
Touching E draw a line FG, starting from the point F on line AC, parallel
to AB to the right hand-side. Mark off FG equal to AB.
Join C and G.
Method of making the moon
From AB mark off AH making AH equal to one-fourth of line AB and
starting from H draw a line HI parallel to line AC touching line CG at
point I.
Bisect CF at J and draw a line JK parallel to AB touching CG at point K.
Let L be the point where lines JK and HI cut one another.
Join J and G.
(10) Let M be the point where line JG and HI cut one another.
(11) With centre M and with a distance shortest from M to BD mark off N on
the lower portion of line HI.
(12) Touching M and starting from O, a point on AC, draw a line from left to
right parallel to AB.
(13) With centre L and radius LN draw a semi-circle on the lower portion and
let P and Q be the points where it touches the line OM respectively.
(14) With centre M and radius MQ draw a semi-circle on the lower portion
touching P and Q.
(15) With centre N and radius NM draw an arc touching PNQ at R and S. Join
RS. Let T be the point where RS and HI cut one another.
(16) With centre T and radius TS draw a semi-circle on the upper portion of
PNQ touching it at two points.
(17) With centre T and radius TM draw an arc on the upper portion of PNQ
touching at two points.
(18) Eight equal and similar triangles of the moon are to be made in the space
lying inside the semi-circle of No. (16) and outside the arc of No. (17) of
this Schedule.
Method of making the sun
(19) Bisect line AF at U, and draw a line UV parallel to AB line touching line
BE at V.
(20) With centre W, the point where HI and UV cut one another and radius
MN draw a circle.
(21) With centre W and radius LN draw a circle.
(22) Twelve equal and similar triangles of the sun are to be made in the space
enclosed by the circles of No. (20) and of No. (21) with the two apexes
of two triangles touching line HI.
Method of making the border
(23) The width of the border will be equal to the width TN. This will be of
deep blue colour and will be provided on all the side of the flag.
However, on the five angles of the flag the external angles will be equal
to the internal angles.
(24) The above mentioned border will be provided if the flag is to be used
with a rope. On the other hand, if it is to be hoisted on a pole, the hole on
the border on the side AC can be extended according to requirements.
Explanation: The lines HI, RS, FE, ED, JG, OQ, JK and UV are imaginary.
Similarly, the external and internal circles of the sun and the other arcs except
the crescent moon are also imaginary. These are not shown on the flag.
Note bene: The size of the National Flag of Nepal shall be as determined by the
Government of Nepal.
Schedule-2
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 9)
National Anthem of Nepal
Sayaun Thunga Phool Ka Hami Eutai Mala Nepali
Sarvavhaum Vai Failiyeka Mechi Mahakali
Prakitika Koti Koti Sampada Ko Aanchala
Bir Haruka Ragata Le Swatantra Ra Atala
Gyana Bhumi Shanti Bhumi Terai Pahad Himala
Akhanda Yo Pyaro Hamro Matri Bhumi Nepal
Bahul Jati Bhasa Dharma Sanskriti Chan Bishala
Agragami Rastra Hamro Jaya Jaya Nepal.
Schedule-3
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 9)
Coat of Arms of Nepal
Note bene:
This Coat of Arms may be made in larger or smaller size as per
necessity. The colour determined by the Government of Nepal
shall be used on it.
Schedule-4
(Relating to clause (3) of Article 56)
States, and Districts to be included in the concerned States
State No. 1
State No. 2
1. Taplejung
2. Panchthar
3. Ilam
4. Sankhuwasabha
5. Tehrathum
6. Dhankuta
7. Bhojpur
8. Khotang
9. Solukhumbu
10. Okhaldhunga
11. Udayapur
12. Jhapa
13. Morang
14. Sunsari
1. Saptari
2. Siraha
3. Dhanusa
4. Mahottari
5. Sarlahi
6. Rautahat
7. Bara
8. Parsa
State No. 3
State No. 4
1. Dolakha
2. Ramechhap
3. Sindhuli
4. Kavrepalanchok
5. Sindhupalchok
6. Rasuwa
7.Nuwakot
8. Dhading
9. Chitwan
10. Makawanpur
11. Bhaktapur
12. Lalitpur
13. Kathmandu
1. Gorkha
2. Lamjung
3. Tanahun
4. Kaski
5. Manang
6. Mustang
7. Parbat
8. Syangja
9. Myagdi
10. Baglung
11.Nawalparasi
(East
Bardaghat Susta)
State No. 5
State No. 6
State No. 7
1. Nawalparasi (West
of Bardaghat Susta
2. Rupandehi
3. Kapilbastu
4. Palpa
5. Arghakhanchi
6. Gulmi
7.Rukun (Eastern Part)
8. Rolpa
9. Pyuthan
10. Daang
11. Banke
12. Bardiya
1.Rukum
(Western
Part)
2. Salyan
3. Dolpa
4. Jumla
5. Mugu
6. Humla
7. Kalikot
8. Jajarkot
9. Dailekh
10. Surkhet
1.Bajura
2.Bajhang
3. Doti
4. Achham
5. Darchula
6. Baitadi
7. Dadeldhura
8. Kanchanpur
9. Kailali
Schedule-5
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 57, and Article 109)
List of Federal Power
Matters
Relating to defence and military
Protection of national unity and territorial integrity
Relating to national security
War and defence
Arms and ammunitions factories and production thereof
Central Police, Armed Police Force, national intelligence and
investigation, peace, security
Central planning, central bank, finance policies, monetary and banking,
monetary policies, foreign grants, aid and loans
Foreign and diplomatic affairs, international relations and United Nations
related matters
International treaties or agreements, extradition, mutual legal assistance
and international borders, international boundary rivers
Telecommunications, allocation of radio frequency, radio, television and
postal matters
Customs, excise-duty, value-added tax, corporate income tax, individual
income tax, remuneration tax, passport fee, visa fee, tourism fee, service
charge and fee, penalty
Federal civil service, judicial service and other government services
Policies relating to conservation and multiple uses of water resources
Inland and inter-State electricity transmission lines
Central statistics (national and international standards and quality)
Central level large electricity, irrigation and other projects
Central universities, central level academies, universities standards and
regulation, central libraries
Health policies, health services, health standards, quality and monitoring,
national or specialised service providing hospitals, traditional treatment
services and communicable disease control
Federal Parliament, Federal Executive, Local Level related affairs, special
structure
International trade, exchange, port, quarantine
Civil aviation, international airports
National transportation policies, management of railways and national
highways
Laws relating to the Supreme Court, High Courts, District Courts and
administration of justice
Citizenship, passport, visa, immigration
Atomic energy, air space and astronomy
Intellectual property (including patents, designs, trademarks and
copyrights)
Measurement
Mines excavation
National and international environment management, national parks,
wildlife reserves and wetlands, national forest policies, carbon services
Insurance policies, securities, cooperatives regulation
Land use policies, human settlement development policies, tourism
policies, environment adaptation
Criminal and civil laws making
Security printing
Social security and poverty alleviation
Constitutional Bodies, commissions of national importance
Sites of archaeological importance and ancient monuments
Any matter not enumerated in the Lists of Federal Powers, State Powers
and Local Level Powers or in the Concurrent List and any matter not
specified in this Constitution and in the Federal laws
Schedule-6
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 57, clause (4) of Article 162,

Article 197, clause (3) of Article 231, clause (7) of Article 232, clause
(4) of Article 274 and clause (4) of Article 296)
List of State Power
Matters
State police administration and peace and order
Operation of banks and financial institutions in accordance with the
policies of Nepal Rastra Bank, cooperative institutions, foreign grants
and assistance with the consent of the Centre
Operation of Radio, F.M., television
House and land registration fee, motor vehicle tax, entertainment tax,
advertisement tax, tourism, agro-income tax, service charge, fee,
penalty
State civil service and other government services
State statistics
State level electricity, irrigation and water supply services, navigation
State universities, higher education, libraries, museums
Health services
Matters relating to the State Assembly, State Council of Ministers
Intra-State trade
State highways
State bureau of investigation
Physical management and other necessary matters of State
governmental offices
State Public Service Commission
Management of lands, land records
Exploration and management of mines
Protection and use of languages, scripts, cultures, fine arts and
religions
Use of forests and waters and management of environment within the
State
Agriculture and livestock development, factories, industrialization,
trade, business, transportation
Management of trusts (Guthi)
Schedule-7
(Relating to clause (3) of Articles 57, Article 109, clause (4) of

Article 162, and Article 197)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation and State
Matters
Civil and criminal procedure, evidence and oaths (legal recognition,
public acts and records, and judicial proceedings)
Supply, distribution, price control, quality and monitoring of essential
goods and services
Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of the
country, prison and detention management, and maintenance of peace
and order
Transfer of accused persons, detainees and prisoners from one State to
another State
Laws relating to family affairs (marriage, transfer of property, divorce,
persons on the verge of extinction, orphan, adoption, succession and
joint family)
Acquisition, requisitioning of property and creation of right in property
Contracts, cooperatives, partnership and agency related matters
Matters relating to bankruptcy and insolvency
Drugs and pesticides
Planning, family planning and population management
Social security and employment, trade unions, settlement of industrial
disputes, and labour rights and disputes related matters
Legal
profession,
auditing,
engineering,
medicines,
Ayurvedic
medicines, veterinary, Amchi and other professions
State boundary river, waterways, environment protection, biological
diversity
Matters related to means of communication
Industries and mines and physical infrastructures
Casino, lottery
Early preparedness for, rescue, relief and rehabilitation from, natural
and man made calamities
Tourism, water supply and sanitation
Motion pictures, cinema halls and sports
Insurance business operation and management
Poverty alleviation and industrialization
Scientific research, science and technology and human resources
development
Utilization of forests, mountains, forest conservation areas and waters
stretching in inter-State form
Land policies and laws relating thereto
Employment and unemployment aid
Schedule-8
(Relating to clause (4) of Article 57, clause (2) of Article 214,
clause (2) of Article 221 and clause (1) of Article 226)
List of Local Level Power
Matters
Town police
Cooperative institutions
Operation of F.M.
Local taxes (wealth tax, house rent tax, land and building
registration fee, motor vehicle tax), service charge, fee, tourism fee,
advertisement tax, business tax, land tax (land revenue), penalty,
entertainment tax, land revenue collection
Management of the Local services
Collection of local statistics and records
Local level development plans and projects
Basic and secondary education
Basic health and sanitation
Local market management, environment protection and biodiversity
Local roads, rural roads, agro-roads, irrigation
Management of Village Assembly, Municipal Assembly, District
Assembly, local courts, mediation and arbitration
Local records management
Distribution of house and land ownership certificates
Agriculture and animal husbandry, agro-products management,
animal health, cooperatives
Management of senior citizens, persons with disabilities and the
incapacitated
Collection of statistics of the unemployed
Management, operation and control of agricultural extension
Water supply, small hydropower projects, alternative energy
Disaster management
Protection of watersheds, wildlife, mines and minerals
Protection and development of languages, cultures and fine arts
Schedule-9
(Relating to clause (5) of Article 57, Article 109, clause (4) of Article 162,

Article 197, clause (2) of Article 214, clause (2) of Article 221, and clause (1) of

Article 226)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation, State and Local Level
Matters
Cooperatives
Education, health and newspapers
Health
Agriculture
Services such as electricity, water supply, irrigation
Service fee, charge, penalty and royalty from natural
resources, tourism fee
Forests, wildlife, birds, water uses, environment, ecology and
bio-diversity
Mines and minerals
Disaster management
Social security and poverty alleviation
Personal events, births, deaths, marriages and statistics
Archaeology, ancient monuments and museums
Landless squatters management
Royalty from natural resources
Motor vehicle permits

===== SOURCE: Cyber-Crime-Act(2063).pdf =====

The Electronic Transactions Act, 2063 (2008)
Date of Authentication and Publication
22 Mansir 2063 ( december 8, 2006)
Act number 27 of the year 2063
An Act promulgated for Electronic Transactions
Preamble:
WHEREAS, it is expedient to make, legal provisions for authentication and
regularization of the recognition, validity, integrity and reliability of generation,
production, processing, storage, communication and transmission system of electronic
records by making the transactions to be carried out by means of electronic data
exchange or by any other means of electronic communications, reliable and secured;
And where as, for controlling the acts of unauthorized use of electronic records or of
making alteration in such records through the illegal manner,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the House of Representatives in the First Year of the
issuance of the Proclamation of the House of Representatives, 2063(2007) .

Chapter - 1
Preliminary
Short Title, Extension and Commencement: (1) This Act may be
called "The Electronic Transactions act,2063 (2008)".
(2) This Act shall be deemed to have been commenced from 24 Bhadra
2063 ( sep.2, 2006).
This Act shall extend throughout Nepal and shall also apply to
any person residing anywhere by committing an offence in contravention to
this Act.
Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act,-
"Asymmetric Crypto System" means a system that creates a secured
key-pair consisting of a private key creating a digital signature and a
public key to verify the digital signature.
"License" means a license obtained pursuant to Sub-section (3) of

Section 18.
"Originator" means a person who generates, stores or transmits
electronic records, and this term also includes a person who causes any
other person to carry out such functions:
Provided that it shall not include an intermediary.
"Computer" means an electro-magnetic, optical or other high-speed data
processing device or system, which performs logical, arithmetic and
memory functions by manipulating electro-magnetic or optical impulses,
and also includes all acts of input, output, processing, storage and
computer software or communication facilities which are connected or
related to the computer in any computer system or computer network.
"Computer Database" means an information, knowledge and concept or
presentation of instructions, which are being prepared or have already
been prepared in word, image, voice or audio visual form in a
formalized manner or which have been produced by a computer,
computer system or computer network, with a view to use in a
computer, computer system or computer network.
"Computer Network" means an interrelationship between two or more
than two computers having interconnection with each other or in contact
of communication.
"Computer System" means a device or a group of devices, containing all
computer programmes including input and output support devices,
electronic instructions, input and output data that performs logical,
arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication including
controlling functions.
"Computer Resource" means a computer, computer system, computer
network, data, computer database or software.
"Subscriber" means a person who has obtained a certificate under Subsection (3) of Section 31.
"Key Pair" means a private key in an asymmetric crypto system and of
pair of public key, interconnected in a mathematics form with the
private key which has a code to verify digital signature by the public key
to be created from the private key.
"Data" means the presentation of information, knowledge, fact and
concept or instructions in any form, which are kept in a formalized
manner in a computer system or computer network and is intended for
processing the same, or processed or stored in a computer memory.
"Tribunal" means the Information Technology Tribunal formed pursuant
to section 60.
"Private Key" means a key of any key pair used to create a digital
signature.
"Controller" means the Controller appointed or designated pursuant to

section 13.
"Digital Signature" means a signature made in any electronic form to be
included in the transformation of electronic record by a person having a
nontransformed initial electronic record and the public key of signatory
by using a type of asymmetric crypto system that may clearly ascertain
the following matters:
Whether or not transformation of electronic record was
created by using a type of private key keeping a logical consistency with
the public key of signatory; and
Whether or not the initial electronic record has been
changed after the transformation of electronic record.
"Access" means an opportunity of gaining entry into, logical,
arithmetical or resources of memory function of any computer,
computer system or computer network, giving instructions to such
resources or making communication contact with such resources.
"Appellate Tribunal" means the Information Technology Appellate
Tribunal formed pursuant to section 66.
"Certificate" means a Digital Signature Certificate issued by the
Certifying Authority under Section 30.
"Certification Practice Statement" means any statement issued by a
Certifying Authority to specify the practices to be applied by the
Certifying Authority while issuing a Digital Signature Certificate.
"Certifying Authority" means a certifying authority which has obtained
a license to issue a Digital Signature Certificate under Sub-section (3) of

Section 18.
"Addressee" means a person receiving the processed electronic record as
intended by the originator.
Provided that it shall not include an intermediary.
"Electronic Record" means the data, record, image or sound transmitted,
received or stored in an electronic form by generating the same through
any means.
"Electronic Form" means a form of information transmitted, received or
stored by generating the same through the means of magnetic, optical,
computer memory or similar other devices.
"Public Key" means a key of any key pair used to verify digital
signature.
"Information" means the data details of the scripted texts, images,
sounds, codes, computer programmes, software and computer databases.
"Information system" means a system to generate, produce, transmit,
receive, store and display information or to process the same by other
method.
Software" means any specific part of computer system such as system
software and application software having the capacity for operating
computer hardware.
"Computer Accessory" means a technology such as computer resource,
the information used by any institution in its business, a software-like
item produced or purchased by such an institution, hardware and
computer network.
"Government Authority" means a Ministry, Secretariat, Department of
Government of Nepal or the Offices thereunder, Constitutional Body or
the Offices thereunder, Court or Tribunal or Office of the Nepal Army
and it shall also includes other Offices of the similar nature.
"Public Institution" means the following institutions:-
(1) A company, bank or board whether fully or partially owned or
controlled by Government of Nepal , or a Commission agency,
authority, corporation, enterprise board, centre, council and other
corporate body of the similar nature established by Government
of Nepal pursuant to the laws prevailing.
(2) A university, school, research centre, and other similar academic
or educational institutions operated by Government of Nepal or
which have been receiving a full or partial grant from
Government of Nepal,
(3) The Local Bodies formed under the Local Self-Governance Act,
1998 (2055 B.S);
(4) The Institutions run on the loan, grant or guarantee of
Government of Nepal;
(5) The Institution which is fully or partially owned or controlled by
the institution referred to in sub-Clauses (1), (2), (3) or (4) or
which receiving grant from such institution;
(6) Any other Institutions prescribed by Government of Nepal as a
public institution by a notification published in the Nepal
Gazette.
“Prescribed” or “As prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed in
Rules framed under this Act.

Chapter - 2
Provisions Relating to Electronic Record and Digital Signature
Authencity of Electronic Record: (1) Any subscriber may, subject to the
provisions of this section, authenticate to any electronic record by his/her
personal digital signature.
While authenticating the electronic record pursuant to Subsection (1), an act of transforming such electronic record to other electronic
record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto system and hash
function.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, "hash function" means the acts of
mapping of algorithm or translating of a sequence of bits into another,
generally smaller, set yielding the same hash result from any record in the same
form while executing the algorithm each and every time by using the same
record as an input, infeasible to derive or reconstruct any record from the hash
result produced by the algorithm from the computation point of view, and
making the two records, which produce the same hash result by using the
algorithm, computationally infeasible to derive.
Any person may verify the electronic record by using the public
key of the subscriber.
Legal Recognition of Electronic Record: Where the prevailing law
requires any information, documents, records or any other matters to be kept in
written or printed typewritten form, then, if such information, document, record
or the matter is maintained in an electronic form by fulfilling the procedures as
stipulated in this Act or the Rules made hereunder, such electronic record shall
also have legal validity.
Legal Recognition of Digital Signature: Where the prevailing law requires
any information, document, record or any other matters to be certified by
affixing signature or any document to be signed by any person; then, if such
information, documents, records or matters are certified by the digital signature
after fulfilling the procedures as stipulated in this Act or the Rules made
hereunder, such digital signature shall also have legal validity.
Electronic Records to be Kept Safely: Where the prevailing law requires
any information, document or record to be kept safely for any specific period of
time and if such information, document or record are kept safely in an
electronic form, by fulfilling the following condition,, such information,
document or record shall have legal validity if that is,-
kept in an accessible condition making available for a subsequent
reference,
kept safely in the format that can be demonstrated subject to presenting
again exactly in the same format in which they were originally generated
and transmitted or received or stored,
kept making the details available by which the origin, destination and
transmission or date and time of receipt can be identified,
Provided that the provision of this Clause shall not be applied in regard to any
information to be generated automatically for the purpose of transmitting or
receiving any record.
Electronic Record May Fulfill the Requirement of Submission of any
Original Document: Where the prevailing law requires that any record shall
have to be submitted or retained in its main or original form or kept safely,
then, such requirement shall, if the following terms are fulfilled, be deemed to
have been satisfied by the electronic records:
If there exits a ground as prescribed that can be believed that any type of
change is not made in such record by any means from the fist time of its
generation in electronics form,
If such record is of the nature where there is a compulsion of submitting
such document to any person it could be clearly shown to such a person
to whom it requires to do so.
Secured Electronic Records: If the verification has been made as prescribed
in connection with the matter as to whether or not any type of changes are
made into the electronic records generated with the application of security
procedures as prescribed, such electronic records shall be deemed to be a
secured electronic records.
Secured Digital Signature: Where any digital signature made in electronic
record has been examined in a manner as prescribed with the application of
such security procedure as prescribed, then, such digital signature shall be
deemed to be a secured digital signature.

Chapter - 3
Provision Relating to Dispatch, Receipt and Acknowledgement of
Electronic Records
Electronic Record to be Attributed to Originator: (1) Any specific
electronic record shall, in case of any of the following conditions, be attributed
to the originator:
If such an electronic record was transmitted by the originator
him/herself,
If such an electronic record was transmitted by a person who had
the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of such
an electronic record,
Such an electronic record was transmitted through any
information system that was programmed by the originator or on
behalf of the originator to operate automatically.
If any condition exists as prescribed in respect of electronic
record transmitted pursuant to Sub-section (1), the addressee shall assume that
such an electronic record is attributed to any particular originator and shall
have the authority to act thereon accordingly.
Procedure of Receipt and Acknowledgement of Electronic Record:
Where the originator requests the addressee to transmit the
acknowledgement or receipt of electronic record at the time of or before the
dispatch of such electronic record or where there is an agreement between the
originator and addressee to transmit the acknowledgement or receipt of such an
electronic record, then, the provisions of Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) shall be
applied in relation to the receipt and acknowledgement of such an electronic
record.
Where there is no agreement between the originator and
addressee that information or acknowledgement of receipt of electronic record
is to be given in a particular format or by a particular manner, such an
information or receipt may be given as the following:-
by automated or any other means of communication by the
addressee,
by any conduct of the addressee sufficient to indicate that the
originator has received electronic record.
Where the originator has stipulated in relation to any electronic
record that such an electronic record shall be binding on him/her only after the
receipt of information or acknowledgement of receipt of such electronic record
from the addressee, then, unless the information or acknowledgement of receipt
of such an electronic record has been so received from addressee, the electronic
record shall not be deemed to have been transmitted by the originator.
Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record
shall be binding only on receipt of such acknowledgement, and where the
originator and addressee have not agreed upon or have not specified any time
for acknowledgement of such receipt of electronic record, then, the originator
shall have to receive such acknowledgement of receipt of such an electronic
record from addressee within a specified time as prescribed. If such
acknowledgement of receipt is not received from addressee, then, such an
electronic record shall be deemed to have not been transmitted by the
originator.
Other procedures of receipt of acknowledgement of electronic
record shall be as prescribed.
Time and Place of Dispatch and Receipt of Electronic Record: (1)
Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the addressee, the dispatch
of an electronic record occurs when it enters into an information system outside
the control of the originator.
Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the
addressee, the time of receipt of an electronic record shall be determined as
prescribed.
Save as otherwise agreed between the originator and the
addressee, an electronic record shall be deemed to have been dispatched from
the place where the originator has his/her place of business and shall be
deemed to have been received at the place where the addressee has his/her
place of business.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Sub-section "the place of business"
means:
In case the originator or the addressee has more than one place of
business, the place of business means the place where the concerned
business shall be operated
If the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, their
place of residence shall be considered their place of business.

Chapter 4
Provisions Relating to Controller and Certifying Authority:
Appointment
Controller
other
Employees:
Government of Nepal may, by notification in the Nepal Gazette, designate any
Government officer or appoint any person who has qualifications as
prescribed in the office of the Controller.
Government of Nepal may, in order to assist the Controller
to perform his/her functions to be performed under this Act, appoint or assign a
Deputy Controller and other employees as required. The employees so
appointed or assigned shall perform their functions under the general direction
and control of the Controller.
Functions, Duties and Powers of the Controller:
The functions, duties and powers of the controller shall be as follows:-
To issue a license to the certifying Authority,
To exercise the supervision and monitoring over the activities of
Certifying Authority,
To fix the standards to be maintained by certifying authority in respect
to the verification of digital signature,
To specify the conditions to be complied with by the certifying authority
in operating his/her business,
To specify the format of the certificate and contents to be included
therein,
To specify the procedures to be followed by the certifying authority
while conducting his/her dealings with the subscribers,
To maintain a record of information disclosed by the certifying authority
under this act and to make provision of computer database accessible to
public and to update such database,
To perform such other functions as prescribed.
License to be obtained: No person shall perform or cause to be performed
the functions of a certifying authority without obtaining a license under this
Application to be submitted for a License: (1) Any person willing to
work as Certifying Authority by issuing a certificate under this Act and who
has the qualifications as prescribed shall have to submit an application to the
controller in a format as prescribed accompanied by a fee as prescribed for
obtaining a license for the certification.
(2) The applicant applying under Sub-section (1) shall also attach the
following documents:
Details regarding certification,
Documents to prove the identification and verification of the
applicant,
Statements specifying the financial resources, human resources and
other necessary facilities,
Such other documents as prescribed.
The controller may, if he/she thinks necessary, ask the applicant
to serve additional documents and details in connection to examine the
appropriation of the applicant as to perform the function of Certifying
Authority. If the necessary additional documents and details are so asked, no
actions shall be taken upon the application of the applicant unless he/she
submits such documents and details.
Other Functions and Duties of the Certifying Authority:
Other functions and duties of the certifying authority, other than those to
issue a certificate, to suspend or revoke it, shall be as prescribed.
Procedure for granting of a license: (1) The Controller may, on receipt of
an application under section 16, after considering the qualification of applicant
and also the documents and statements decide upon within a period of two
months of receipt of such application whether or not such a person possesses
the financial, physical and human resources, and other facilities as prescribed
and whether or not a license should be issued to such an applicant and a notice
to that effect shall be given to him.
While deciding upon the issuance of a license under Sub-section
(1), the Controller may inspect the facilities, financial and physical resources of
the applicant.
If the Controller decides to issue a license under Sub-section (1),
a license in the prescribed format shall be issued to the applicant specifying the
period of validity of the license and also the terms and conditions to be
followed by him.
Other procedures relating to the issuance of a license shall be as
prescribed.
Renewal of License: (1) A license obtained by Certifying Authority shall
have to renew in each year,
A Certifying Authority desirous to renew the license under Subsection (1), shall have to submit and application in the prescribed format to the
Controller at least two months prior to the expiry of the period of validity of
such a license along with such renewal fee as prescribed,
If an application is submitted for renewal, under Sub-section (2),
the Controller shall have to decide whether to renew the license or not, after
completing the procedures as prescribed one month prior to the expiry date of
validity of such a license,
While deciding to reject to renew a license, the applicant shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present his/her statement in this regard.
License may be suspended: (1) If the documents or statement and statement
of financial and physical resources submitted by the certifying authority before
the Controller in order to obtain a license are found incorrect or false or the
conditions to be complied with in course of operation of business is not
complied with or this Act of the Rules framed hereunder are found to be
violated, the Controller may suspend the license of the certifying authority till
the inquiry in this regard is completed.
Provided that, Certifying Authority shall be given the reasonable
opportunity to present his/her defense prior to such suspension of a license.
Other procedures concerning suspension of license and other
provisions related thereto be as prescribed.
License may be revoked: (1) If the controller believes, after completion of
an inquiry in connection to any activity of Certifying Authority, made duly, as
prescribed, that any of the following circumstances have been occurred, the
Controller may revoke a license issued under this Act, at any time, as he deems
to be appropriate:
If the Certifying Authority fails to comply with the liabilities under this
act and the rules made thereunder.
If it is found that the Certifying Authority has submitted false or
incorrect document or statement at the time of submitting an application
for obtaining a license or for its renewal, as the case may be.
If the Certifying Authority operates business in such a manner so that it
shall make adverse effect to the public interest or to the national
economy,
If the Certifying Authority commits any act that is defined as an offence
under this Act or the Rules framed hereunder.
The Controller shall, prior to revocation of a license under Subsection (1), provide a reasonable opportunity to the Certifying Authority to
present his/her defense.
Other procedures concerning revocation of a license shall be as
prescribed.
Notice of Suspension or revocation of a License: (1) Where a license of
any Certifying Authority is suspended or revoked under Section 20 or 21, as
the case may be the Controller shall give a written notice to the Certifying
Authority of such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, to such a
certifying Authority and shall keep such a notice in his computer database and
also publish in the electronic form.
The Controller shall publish the notice of suspension or
revocation of a license at least in two daily newspapers in Nepali and English
languages for two times.
Provided that, there shall be no effect to any decision of suspension or
revocation, as the case may be, made by the Controller under Section 20 or 21,
merely on the ground of non-publication of such a notice.
Recognition to Foreign Certifying Authority may be given: (1) The
Controller may with the prior approval of Government of Nepal, and subject to
such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, by notification in the
Nepal Gazette, recognize any Certifying Authority who has obtained a license
to certify under any foreign law. Any foreign Certifying Authority so
recognized may issue the certificates under this Act or the Rules made
thereunder throughout the Nepal.
The procedures to be adopted in providing the recognition to a
foreign Certifying Authority as referred to in Sub-section (1), shall be as
prescribed.
The Controller may issue Orders: (1) The Controller may, in order to
cause to fulfill the responsibilities in regard to issuance of a certificate by the
Certifying Authorities, issue directives, from time to time. It shall be a duty of
the Certifying Authority to comply with such directives.
The Controller may delegate power: The Controller may, in order to
perform the function to be performed by him/her delegate to any officer
subordinate to him/her to exercise all or any of his/her powers under this Act or
the Rules framed thereunder.
The Controller may investigate: (1) The Controller may, if he/she
believes that this Act or the Rules framed hereunder are not complied with by
the Certifying Authority or by other concerned person, conduct him/herself or
cause any officer to conduct necessary investigation in that regard.
It shall be a duty of Certifying Authority to assist the
investigations, referred to in Sub-section (1).
The procedure to be followed by the Controller or any other
officer in respect to investigation referred to in Sub-section (1) shall be as
prescribed.
Performance Audit of Certifying Authority: (1) The Controller may
conduct or cause to be conducted performance audit of the Certifying Authority
in each year.
The Controller may, for the purpose of the performance audit
referred to in Sub-section (1), appoint any recognized auditor, who has
expertise in computer security or any computer expert.
The Controller shall publish the report of the performance audit
in the electronic form made under Sub-section (1) by maintaining in his/her
computer database.
The qualification of the performance auditor or remuneration and
the procedures of such audit shall be as prescribed.
The Controller shall fix the standard of the service of Certifying
Authority and publish a notice thereof publicly for the information to the
public-in-general.
The Controller to have the Access to Computers and data: (1) The
Controller shall, if there is a reasonable ground to suspect that provision of this
Act and Rules framed hereunder has been violated, have the power to have the
access to any computer system, apparatus, devices, data, information system or
any other materials connected with such system.
The Controller may, for the purpose of Sub-section (1), issue
necessary directives to the owner of any computer system, apparatus, device,
data, information system or any material connected with such system or to any
other responsible person to provide technical or other cooperation as he/she
deems necessary.
It shall be the duty of the concerned person to comply with such
directive issued under Sub-section (2).
Record to be maintained: (1) The Controller shall maintain records of all
Certificates issued under this Act.
The Controller shall, in order to ensure the privacy and security
of the digital signatures, perform following functions:
(a) To use Computer Security System,
(b) To apply security procedures to ensure the privacy and
integrity of digital signature,
(c) To comply with the standard as prescribed,
The Controller shall maintain and update computerized data base
of all public keys in a computer system.
For the purpose of verification of Digital Signature, the
Controller shall make available a public key to any person requesting for such a

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Digital Signature and Certificates
Certifying Authority may issue a Certificate: Only a licensed or
recognized Certifying Authority under this Act may issue a Digital Signature
Certificate.
Apply to obtain a Certificate: (1) Any person desirous to obtain Digital
Signature Certificate may apply to the Certifying Authority in such a format
along with such fee and other statements as prescribed.
On receipt of an application under Sub-section (1), the Certifying
Authority shall have to decide whether to issue or not a certificate to the
applicant within one month of such application so received.
The Certifying Authority shall, if it decides to issue a certificate
under Sub-section (2), issue a Digital Signature Certificate within seven days
affixing his signature in a prescribed format with the inclusion of such
statements as prescribe and if it decides to reject to issue such certificate, the
applicant shall be notified the reasons for rejection within seven days.
Certificate may be suspended: (1) Certifying Authority may suspend the
Certificate in following circumstances:
(d) If the subscriber obtaining the certificate or any person
authorized to act on behalf of such a subscriber, requests to
suspend the certificate.
(e) If it is found necessary to suspend the certificate that
contravenes public interest as prescribed.
If it is found that significant loss might be caused to those
persons who depend on the certificate by the reason that
provisions of this Act or the Rules framed hereunder were
not followed at the time of issuance of the certificate, and if
the controller instructs to suspend the certificate having
specified the above ground.
Grounds and procedures for suspension and release of the
suspended certificates shall be as prescribed.
Certificate may be revoked: (1) The Controller or the Certifying Authority
may revoke a Certificate in following conditions:
(g) Where the subscriber or any other person authorized by him
requests to revoke a certificate,
(h) If it is necessary to revoke in a certificate that contravenes
the public interest as prescribed,
Upon the death of the subscriber,
Upon the insolvency, winding up or dissolution of the
company or corporate body under the prevailing laws,
where the subscriber is a company or a corporate body.
(k) If it is proved that a requirement for issuance of the
Certificate was not satisfied.
If a material fact represented in the certificate is proved to
be false.
(m) If a key used to generate key pair or security system was
compromised in a manner that affects materially the
Certificate's reliability.
The procedures to be followed by the Controller or Certifying
Authority with respect to revocation of a Certificate shall be as prescribed.
Notice of Suspension or Revocation: (1) Where a Certificate is suspended
or revoked under sections 32 or 33, the Certifying Authority or the Controller,
as the case may be, shall publish a public notice thereof maintaining its record
in their repository.
It shall be the responsibility of the Certifying Authority or the
Controller, as the case may be, to communicate the subscribers as soon as
possible on suspension or revocation Certificates.

Chapter-6
Functions, Duties and Rights of Subscriber
To Generate Key pair: (1) Where any Certificate issued by the Certifying
Authority and accepted by subscriber, consisting of a public key which
corresponds to the key pair and to be listed in such Certificate and if such key
pair is supposed to be generated by the subscriber only, then the subscriber
shall generate such key pair by applying the secured asymmetric crypto system.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), if a
Certifying Authority and the subscriber have concluded an agreement or the
Certifying Authority has accepted any specific system regarding the security
system to be used to generate the key pair, then, it shall be the duty of
subscriber to apply the security system as specified in agreement or accepted
by the Certifying Authority.
To Accept a Certificate: (1) The certificate shall be deemed to have been
accepted by the subscriber in the following conditions:
(n) If he publishes such a certificate or authorizes to publish to
one or more persons, or
(o) If there exists any ground of his acceptance to such
certificate which may cause to believe it.
If the certificate is accepted it shall be deemed that the subscriber,
by that reason, has guaranteed to all who reasonably rely on the information
contained in the certificate that-
The subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public
key and is entitled to hold the same,
All representations and information made by the subscriber to the
Certifying Authority in course of issuance of the certificate are
true and correct and all facts relevant to the information
contained in the certificate are true, and
All information mentioned in the certificate is, to the best
knowledge of subscriber, is true and correct.
To retain the private key in a secured manner: (1) Every subscriber shall
exercise reasonable care to retain control of the private key corresponding to
the public key listed in the Certificate and adopt all measures to prevent its
disclosure to a person not authorized to affix the digital signature of subscriber.
If the private key has been disclosed or compromised by any
reason whatsoever, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without
any delay to the Certifying Authority and on receipt of such information the
Certifying Authority shall immediately suspend such a Certificate.
If a certificate is suspended under this Act, it shall be a duty of
the subscriber to retain the private key under this section in a safe manner
throughout the duration of such suspension of Certificate.
To Deposit the Private Key to the Controller: (1) If the Controller
thinks, in order to protect the sovereignty or integrity of Nepal, to maintain the
friendly relations with friendly countries, to maintain the law and order, to
prevent from committing of any offence under the laws prevailing, and or in
other conditions as prescribed, necessary to issue an order to any subscriber to
deposit the private key to him/her specifying reason there for, such a subscriber
shall immediately deposit the private key to the Controller.
The controller shall not inform any unauthorized person about the
private key deposited as per sub section (1).

Chapter-7
Electronic Record and Government use of Digital Signature
39. Government Documents may be published in electronic form: (1)
Government of Nepal may also publish ordinance, Act, Rules Bye-laws,
Formation Orders or notifications or any other matters in the electronic form
which are published in the Nepal Gazette under the prevailing laws.
Where the prevailing law provides for the filing of any form,
application or any other document or any record to be generated or retained or
secured and or any license or permit or approval or certificate to be issued or
provided or any payment to be made in any Government agency, or public
entity or in any bank or financial institution operating business within the
Nepal, it may be filed, generated, retained or secured or issued or granted in
electronic form or payment may be made in electronic mode of
communication, and, it shall not be denied to provide the legal validity to such
form, application, document record, license, permit or approval, certificate or
payment on the ground of the use of electronic form or electronic
communication mode.
To Accept the Document in Electronic Form: (1) Government agency
or public entity or bank or financial institutions operating business within the
Nepal may also accept any document and payment to be submitted or paid to
them under the prevailing law in electronic form or through any electronic
mode and if such documents and submitted or payment is made, as the case
may be, it shall not be denied to grant legal recognition merely on the ground
that it was accepted electronic form or through any electronic mode.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) no
Government agency or public entity or bank of financial institution operating
business within the Nepal shall, except in the conditions as prescribed and
government agencies as prescribed, be compelled to accept any document or
payment in electronic form, and such an agency or institution shall, except in
the conditions and agency as prescribed, not compel to any other persons to
accept any document in electronic form or the payment through any electronic
form.
For the purpose of Sub-section (1), the provision relating to the
procedure, process and format to be followed shall as prescribed.
Use of Digital Signature in Government Offices: (1) Where it is
required that the concerned person shall have to affix his/her signature in any
document or record for verification of such document or record to be
transmitted or issued by any Government agency or public entity or bank or
financial institution operating business within the Nepal or to be accepted by
such agency or institution then, Government of Nepal may, if it thinks
appropriate, make a provision to use digital signature instead of such a
signature.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
Government of Nepal may, for the purpose of the provision made in Subsection (1), prescribe additional security procedure for the verification and
authentication of such digital signature.
Provisions regarding the Certifying Authority and Digital
Signature Certificate to be used by the government agency or entity referred to
in Sub-section (1), shall be as prescribed.
Chapter –8
Provisions Relating to Network Service
Liability of Network Service Providers: Intermediaries providing their
services as network service providers shall undertake the following liabilities in
regard to such service provided by them:
Liabilities referred to in the agreement made with the subscriber in
regard to service provision,.
Liabilities referred to in the license of network service providers, and,
Any such other liability as prescribed.
Network Service Provider not to be Liable: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 42, no network service provider shall be liable to bear any
criminal or civil liability arising from any fact or statement mentioned or
included in the information or data of the third party made available in
electronic form by him/her merely on the ground that he/she has made
available the access to such information or data.
Provided that, such a person or institution providing network service
shall not be relieved from such liability, if he/she has made available access to
such information or data with the knowledge that any fact or statement
mentioned or included in such information or data contravene this Act or Rules
framed hereunder.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section" Third Party" means a net work
service provider who provides service as intermediary and any person over
whom there is no control of the network service provider.

Chapter -9
Offence Relating To Computer
To Pirate, Destroy or Alter computer source code: When computer
source code is required to be kept as it is position for the time being the
prevailing law, if any person, knowingly or with malafide intention, pirates,
destroys, alters computer sources code to be used for any computer, computer
programme, computer system or computer network or cause, other to do so,
he/she shall be liable to the punishment with imprisonment not exceeding three
years or with a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand Rupees or with both.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section "computer source code" means
the listing of programmes, computer command, computer design and layout
and programme analysis of the computer resource in any form.
Unauthorized Access in Computer Materials: If any person with an
intention to have access in any programme, information or data of any
computer, uses such a computer without authorization of the owner of or the
person responsible for such a computer or even in the case of authorization,
performs any act with an intention to have access in any programme,
information or data contrary to from such authorization, such a person shall be
liable to the punishment with the fine not exceeding Two Hundred Thousand
Rupees or with imprisonment not exceeding three years or with both depending
on the seriousness of the offence.
Damage to any Computer and Information System: If any person
knowingly and with a mala fide intention to cause wrongful loss or damage to
any institution destroys, damages, deletes, alters, disrupts any information of
any computer source by any means or diminishes value and utility of such
information or affects it injuriously or causes any person to carryout such an
act, such a person shall be liable to the punishment with the fine not exceeding
two thousand Rupees and with imprisonment not exceeding three years or with
both.
Publication of illegal materials in electronic form: (1) If any person
publishes or displays any material in the electronic media including computer,
internet which are prohibited to publish or display by the prevailing law or
which may be contrary to the public morality or decent behavior or any types
of materials which may spread hate or jealousy against anyone or which may
jeopardize the harmonious relations subsisting among the peoples of various
castes, tribes and communities shall be liable to the punishment with the fine
not exceeding One Hundred Thousand Rupees or with the imprisonment not
exceeding five years or with both.
If any person commit an offence referred to in Sub-section (1)
time to time he/she shall be liable to the punishment for each time with one and
one half percent of the punishment of the previous punishment.
Confidentiality to Divulge: Save otherwise provided for in this Act or Rules
framed hereunder or for in the prevailing law, if any person who has an access
in any record, book, register, correspondence, information, documents or any
other material under the authority conferred under this Act or Rules framed
hereunder divulges or causes to divulge confidentiality of such record, books,
registers, correspondence, information, documents or materials to any
unauthorized person, he/she shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not
exceeding Ten Thousands Rupees or with imprisonment not exceeding two
years or with both, depending on the degree of the offence.
To inform False statement: If any person with an intention to obtain a
license from Certifying Authority under this Act or with any other intention
either to Controller or with an intention to obtain Digital Signature Certificate
or with any other intention conceals statement knowingly or lies any statement
to be submitted to the Certifying Authority any false statements shall be liable
to the punishment with a fine not exceeding One Hundred Thousands rupees
or with an imprisonment not exceeding two years or with both.
Submission or Display of False License or Certificates: (1) If any
person who works as a Certifying Authority without a license issued by the
Controller under this Act, shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousands Rupees or with an imprisonment not
exceeding two years or with both, depending on seriousness of the offence.
Any person without obtaining a license from the Certifying
Authority publishes a fake license or false statement in regard to license or
provides to any person by any other means, shall be liable to the punishment
not exceeding one hundred thousand Rupees in the case where the act referred
to in Sub-section (1) has not been accomplished by such a person.
If any person publishes or otherwise makes available a certificate
to any other person by any means knowingly that a certificate is not issued by
the Certifying Authority referred to in such a certificate or the subscriber listed
in such certificate has not accepted the certificate or such a certificate is already
suspended or revoked, shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousands Rupees or with an imprisonment not
exceeding two years or with both.
Provided that, if such a certificate suspended or revoked is published or
provided for the purpose of verification of the Digital Signature before it was
suspended or revoked, it shall not be deemed to have been committed an
offence under this Sub-section.
Non-submission of Prescribed Statements or Documents: (1) If any
person responsible to submit any statement, document or report to the
Controller or Certifying Authority under this Act or Rules framed hereunder,
fails to submit such statement, document, or report within the specified time
limit, such a person shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not exceeding
fifty thousands Rupees.
Any person who fails to maintain duly any book, register, records
or account and in a secured manner to be maintained duly and in a secured
manner under this Act or Rules framed hereunder shall be liable to the
punishment with a fine not exceeding fifty thousands Rupees.
To commit computer fraud: If any person, with an intention to commit any
fraud or any other illegal act, creates, publishes or otherwise provides digital
signature certificate or acquires benefit from the payment of any bill, balance
amount of any one's account, any inventory or ATM card in connivance of or
otherwise by committing any fraud, amount of the financial benefit so acquired
shall be recovered from the offender and be given to the person concerned and
such an offender shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not exceeding one
hundred thousand Rupees or with an imprisonment not exceeding two years or
with both.
Abetment to commit computer related offence: A person who abets
other to commit an offence relating to computer under this Act or who attempts
or is involved in the conspiracy to commit such an offence shall be liable to the
punishment with a fine not exceeding fifty thousand Rupees or with
imprisonment not exceeding six months or with both, depending on the degree
of the offence.
Punishment to the Accomplice: A person who assists others to commit
any offence under this Act or acts as accomplice, by any means shall be liable
to one half of the punishment for which the principal is liable.
Punishment in an offence committed outside Nepal: Notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws, if any person commits any act which
constitutes an offence under this Act and which involves the computer,
computer system or computer network system located in Nepal, even though
such an act is committed while residing outside Nepal, a case may be filed
against such a person and shall be punished accordingly.
Confiscation: Any computer, computer system, floppy, compact disks, tape
drivers, softwares or any other accessory devices used to commit any act
deemed to be an offence relating to computer under this Act shall be liable to
confiscation.
Offences Committed by a corporate body: (1) If any act is done by a
corporate body which deems an offence under this Act, such an offence shall
be deemed to have been committed by a person who was responsible as chief
for the operation of the corporate body at the time of committing such an
offence.
Provided that, if the person who was responsible as a chief for the
operation of such a corporate body proves that such an offence was committed
without his/her knowledge or that he/she exercised all reasonable efforts to
prevent such an offence, he/she shall not be liable to the guilty.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), if it is
proved that any offence under this Act committed by a corporate body with the
consent or in knowledge or by the reason of negligence of a director, manager,
secretary or any other responsible person of such corporate body, such an
offence shall be deemed to have been committed by such a corporate body and
by a director, manager, secretary or other responsible person of such a
corporate body.
Other Punishment: If any violation of this Act or Rules framed hereunder
has been committed, for which no penalty has been separately provided, such a
violator shall be liable to the punishment with a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand Rupees, or with an imprisonment not exceeding six months or with
both.
No Hindrance to Punish Under the Laws prevailing: If any act deemed to be
an offence under this Act shall also be deemed to be another offence under the
laws prevailing, it shall not be deemed to have been hindered by this Act to file
a separate case and punish accordingly.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Information Technology Tribunal
Constitution of a Tribunal: (1) Government of Nepal shall, in order to
initiate the proceedings and adjudicate the offences concerning computer as
referred to in Chapter -9, constitute a three member Information Technology
Tribunal consisting of one member each of law, Information Technology and
Commerce by notification in the Nepal Gazette from amongst the persons who
are qualified under section 60.
The Law Member shall be the chairperson of the Tribunal.
The Tribunal shall exercise its jurisdiction as prescribed.
Any person aggrieved by an order or a decision made by Tribunal
may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within thirty five days from the date of
such order or decision, as the case may be.
Qualification of the Member of the Tribunal: (1) Any person who has
the knowledge in information technology and, who is or who has been or who
is qualified to be a judge in the District Court, shall be eligible to be a law
member of the Tribunal.
A Nepalese citizen who holds at least master degree in computer
science or information technology and who has at least three years experience
in the field of electronic transactions, information technology or electronic
communication, shall be eligible to be a information technology member of the
Tribunal.
(3) A Nepali citizen who holds at least master degree in management
or commerce and who has specialization in the field of electronic transaction
and who has at least three years experience in the related field shall be eligible
to be a commerce member of the Tribunal.
Terms of office, remuneration and conditions of service of the
Member of Tribunal: (1) The term of office of a member of the Tribunal
shall be of five years and he/she shall be eligible for reappointment.
Remuneration and the terms and conditions of the service of a
Member of the Tribunal shall as prescribed.
Every Member of the Tribunal shall, before assuming his/her
office, take the oath of his/her office and secrecy before the Chief Judge of
Appellate Court in a format and in a manner as prescribed.
Circumstances under which office shall be fallen vacant and filling
up of vacancy: (1) Office of a Member of the Tribunal shall be fallen
vacant in the following circumstances:
On expiry of terms of office,
On attainment of sixty three years of age.
On death,
If one tenders resignation,
If one is convicted by a court on any criminal offence involving
moral turpitude, or
If it is proved that one has misbehavior or has become
incompetent to perform one's duty while making an inquiry by
Government of Nepal on the charge that one has misbehavior
against one's office or has become incompetent to perform one's
duty.
Provided that, a Member of the Tribunal charged under this
Clause shall given a reasonable opportunity to defense his/her case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Clause (f), if the
law member of the Tribunal is a sitting judge, while making such an
inquiry, it shall be done in accordance with the prevailing law
concerning his/her terms of service.
The procedure of inquiry, for the purpose of Clause (f) of
Sub-section Sub-section (1), shall be as prescribed.
Government of Nepal shall, in case of vacancy of the
office of any member of Tribunal under Sub-section (1), fulfill such
vacancy from among the persons who are qualified under section 61 for
remaining term of office of such a member.
Staff of the Tribunal: (1) Government of Nepal shall make available
necessary staff to the Tribunal to perform its functions.
Other provisions regarding the staff of the Tribunal shall be as
prescribed.
Procedures to be followed by the Tribunal: The Tribunal shall, while
initiating proceedings and adjudicating the case under section 60, shall follow
the procedures as prescribed.

Chapter-11
Provisions Relating to Information Technology Appellate Tribunal
Establishment and formation of the Appellate Tribunal: (1)
Government of Nepal shall, in order to hear the appeal against the order or the
decision made by the Tribunal and to hear the appeal against the decision or
order made by the Controller or by the Certifying Authority, as the case may
be, under this Act, by notification in the Nepal Gazette, establish a three
member Information Technology Appellate Tribunal consisting of one member
each of law, information technology and commerce from among the persons
who are qualified under section 67,
Law Member shall be the chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal.
Exercise of the jurisdiction of Appellate Tribunal shall be as
prescribed.
Qualification of the Member of Appellate Tribunal: (1) A person who
has the knowledge in information technology and who is or who has already
been or who is qualified to be a judge in the Appellate Court shall be eligible to
be a law member of the Appellate Tribunal.
A Nepali citizen who holds at least master degree in computer
science or information technology and who has at least five years experience in
the electronic transaction, information technology or electronic communication
shall be eligible to be an information technology member of the Tribunal.
A Nepali citizen who holds at least master degree in management
or commerce and who has specialization in the field of electronic transactions
and who has at least five years experience in the relevant field, shall be eligible
to be a commerce member.
Terms of Office, Remuneration and Terms & Conditions of the
service of the Member of Appellate Tribunal: (1) The term of office of
the member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be of five years and he/she shall be
eligible for reappointment.
Remuneration and other terms and conditions of the services of
the members of the Appellate Tribunal shall as prescribed.
A member of the Appellate Tribunal shall, before assuming
his/her office after appointment, take the oath of his/her office and secrecy
before the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.
Conditions of Vacancy of Office and filling up of such Vacancy: (1)
Office of a Member of Appellate Tribunal shall be fallen vacant in the
following circumstances:
(a) On expiry of terms of office,
(b) On attainment of sixty three years age,
(c) On death,
(d) If one tenders resignation
(e) If one is convicted by a court on any criminal offence involving
moral turpitude, and,
If it is proved that one has misbehavior or has become
incompetent to perform one's duty, while making an inquiry by
Government of Nepal on the charge that one has misbehavior
against one's office or has become incompetent to perform one's
duty.
Provided that, a member of the Appellate Tribunal charged under this
Clause shall be given a reasonable opportunity to defense his/her case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Clause (f), if the law
member of the Tribunal is a sitting judge, while making such an inquiry, it shall
be done in accordance with the prevailing law concerning his/her terms of
service.
The procedure of inquiry, for the purpose of Clause (f) of Subsection (1), shall as prescribed.
Government of Nepal shall, in case of vacancy of the office of
any member of Tribunal under Sub-section (1), fulfill such vacancy from
amongst the persons who are qualified under section 67 for remaining term of
office of such a member.
70. Staff of the Appellate Tribunal: (1) Government of Nepal shall make
available necessary staff to Appellate Tribunal to perform its functions.
Other provisions regarding the staff of the Appellate Tribunal
shall be as prescribed.
Procedures to be followed by the Appellate Tribunal: The Tribunal
shall, while initiating proceedings and adjudicating the appeal filed before it,
shall follow the procedures as prescribed.

Chapter-12
Miscellaneous
Provision may be made by an Agreement: The parties involved to the
work for creating, transmitting, receiving, storage or for processing through
any other means, of any electronic record may make the provision by an
agreement, not to apply any or all provisions of the Chapter 3 or to alter some
of the provisions referred to in the said Chapter in course of their business and
may make the provisions to regulate their activities accordingly.
73. Government of Nepal may issue Directives: Government of Nepal may, in
regard to the implementation of this Act, issue necessary directives to the
Controller or Certifying Authority, and in such a case, it shall be a duty of the
Controller or Certifying Authority, as the case may be, to comply with such
directives.
Time Limitation to file a Complaint: If a violation of this Act or Rules
framed hereunder has been occurred or if any act deemed to be an offence
under this Act has been committed, first information report in regard to such a
violation or an offence shall have to file within thirty five days of the
information on which such a violation has been occurred or an offence has
been committed.
Government of Nepal to be a Plaintiff: (1) Any case deemed to be an
offence under this Act shall be initiated by Government of Nepal as plaintiff
and such a case shall be deemed have been included in Schedule 1 of the
Government Cases Act, 1992 (2049).
While conducting investigation of a case under Sub-section (1),
the police has to take assistance of the Controller or other concerned expert, as
the case may be.
Compensation to be Recovered: If any loss or damage has been caused to
any person by the reason of offence committed under this Act, the
compensation of such loss or damage shall also be recovered from the offender.
This Act shall not Apply: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Act, this Act shall not be applied in the following matters:
Negotiable Instruments as referred to in the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 2034 (1977).
Deed of will, deed of mortgage, bond, deed of conveyance,
partition or any such deed related with transfer of the title in any
immovable property,
Any other document which demonstrates title or ownership in
any immovable property,
Power of Attorney, statement of claim, statement of defense or
any such other documents as may be used in courts proceedings,
Statement of claim, counter-claim, statement of defense or any
such other document as may be submitted in writing in the
proceedings of any Arbitration,
Documents as prescribed by the prevailing law that requires not
to retain in electronic form.
Notwithstanding
anything
contained
Sub-section
Government of Nepal may, by notification in the Nepal Gazette, alter the
documents referred to in Sub-section (1).
Power to Frame Rules: Government of Nepal may in order to fulfill the
objective of this Act, frame necessary Rules.
To Frame and Enforce the Directives: Government of Nepal may, in
order to achieve the objective of this Act, frame and enforce necessary
directives, subject to this Act and Rules framed hereunder.
Effect of inoperativeness of The Electronic Transactions Ordinance,
2063 (2008): With the Electronic Transactions Ordinance, 2063 (2008) being
inoperative, unless a different intention appears, the inoperativeness shall not,
(a) Revive anything not prevailing or existing at the time, at which
the Ordinance became inoperative,
(b) Affect the matter in operation as per the Ordinance or anything
duly done or any punishment suffered there under,
(c) Affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under the Ordinance,
(d) Affect any penalty, punishment or forfeiture incurred under the
Ordinance,
(e) Affect any action or remedy made or taken in respect of any such
right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty or punishment as
aforesaid; and any such legal proceeding or remedy may be
instituted, continued or enforced as if the Ordinance were in
force.

===== SOURCE: Drugs Act(2035).pdf =====

Drugs Act, 2035, (1978)
Date of Authentication and Publication
2035.7.8 (25 October 1978)
Amending Acts:
The Drugs (First Amendment) Act, 2045 (1988)
2045.7.10 (26 November 1988)
The Drugs (Second Amendment) Act, 2057 (2000)
2057.8.14 (29 November 2000)
Act number 21 of the year 2053 (1978)
An Act Made to Make Provisions relating to Drugs
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to prevent the misuse or abuse of drugs and allied
pharmaceutical substances and false or misleading information relating to the efficacy and use of
drugs and to control the production, sale, distribution, export, import, storage and consumption of
those drugs which are not safe for public consumption, efficacious and of standard quality;
Now, therefore, His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev has, with the aid
and advice of the National Panchayat, enacted this Act.

Chapter1
Preliminary
Short title, extent and commencement: (1) This Act may be called as the
“Drugs Act, 2035 (1978)”.
This Act shall extend to the whole of Nepal.

Section 1 of this Act shall come into force immediately, and other
sections shall come into force in such area and on such date as Government of
Nepal may, by notification in the Nepal Gazette, appoint from time to time.
 Notifications on the commencement of the Act:
(a) Sections 3 and 4 of this Act have been appointed to commence forthwith to the whole of Nepal (the
Nepal Gazette dated 2037.3.5 (18 June 1980).
(b) Sections 2, 25, Sub-section (1) of section 34, sections 38 and 39 of this Act have been appointed to
commence forthwith to the whole of the Nepal (the Nepal Gazette dated 2040.3.13 (27 June 1983).
(c) Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 37 of this Act have been appointed to commence to the whole of the
Nepal on 2040.12.6 (19 March 1984) (the Nepal Gazette dated 2040.12.6 (19 March 1984).
(d) Sections 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 28, 29, 30, 33 and Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 34 of this Act have
been appointed to commence to the whole of the Nepal on 2043.4.1 (16 July 1986) (the Nepal
Gazette dated 2043.2.12 (26 May 1986).
(e) Sections 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 32, 35 and 36 o f this Act have been
appointed
commence to the whole of the Kingdom of Nepal on 2046.5.26 (11 September 1989) (the Nepal
Gazette dated 2046.5.26 (11 September 1989).
(f) Section 26 of this Act has been appointed to commence on 2049.8.1 (16 November 1992) (the
Nepal Gazette dated 2049.8.1(16 November 1992).
Definitions: In this Act, Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires,-
“Drug” means any substance to be used for the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment or prevention of a disease in a human being, animal or bird or to be
used to destruct vermin or insects which cause diseases in the human being,
animal or bird or any substance used to affect the structure or any organic
function of the body of a human being, animal or bird or allied ingredients or
components to be used for the preparation of such substance.
“Manufacture” means the process of making, preparing, refining, altering,
packing, repacking or labeling a drug or any or all of the processes followed
in this respect.
Provided that, this term does not include the process of dispensing,
packing or repacking a drug prior to its consumption or sale.
(c) “Dispensing” means the issuing of a drug in a suitable container, appropriately
labeled and compounded for its subsequent consumption by a
patient.
Explanation: For purposes of this Clause, “compound” means the process of
mixing two or more specific ingredients to fabricate them into a single drug.
(d) “Label” means the name and other related description of a drug written on the
container of that drug.
(e) “Doctor” means a (doctor) registered pursuant to the Nepal Medical
Council Act, 2020 (1964).
(f) “Consumption” means the giving or administering of a drug either by a
(doctor) or by a person authorized by the (doctor) to a patient with intention
to bring about improvement in his/her physical or mental condition at
that time or the taking or administering of such drug by the patient
him/herself according to the prescription written by such doctor.
(g) “Department” means the Department of Drugs Administration constituted
pursuant to Section 5.
(h) “Administrator” means the Head of Department.
(i) “Inspector” means a person deputed by the Department for purposes of

Chapter-6♣
(j) “Prescribed” or “as prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed in the Rules
framed under this Act.

Chapter2
Drugs Advisory Council and Drugs Advisory Committee
Drugs Advisory Council: (1) A Drugs Advisory Council shall be constituted as
prescribed to advise Government of Nepal on theoretical and administrative
matters relating to drugs.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the Drugs Advisory Council shall
be as prescribed.
Drugs Advisory Committee: (1) A Drugs Advisory Committee shall be
constituted as prescribed to advise the Department on technical matters related
with the research, development and control of drugs.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the Drugs Advisory Committee
shall be as prescribed.

Chapter3
Research and Control of Drugs
Department of Drug Administration: (1) Government of Nepal shall
establish a Department of Drug Administration for the implementation of the
objectives of this Act.
The Department established pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall carry
out all the functions related with the control of drugs under this Act and the Rules
framed there under.
♣ Amended by the First Amendment.
Drug Research Laboratory and Other Laboratories: (1) The Drug
Research Laboratory established by Government of Nepal shall be the principal
body of Government of Nepal to perform scientific research, testing and analysis
of drugs.
♦(1a)The procedures to be followed by the Royal Drug Research Laboratory
established pursuant to Sub-section (1) in performing scientific research, testing
and analysis of drugs shall be as prescribed.
(2) Any native or foreign person or institution may, with the approval of
Government of Nepal , establish any other research centre or laboratory for
the scientific research and development of any drugs.

Chapter4
Manufacture, Sale, Distribution, Export and Import of Drugs
Recommendation letter to be obtained to establish drug industry: Any
person who intends to establish an industry to manufacture any drugs shall obtain a
recommendation letter from the Department as prescribed, prior to the obtaining of
approval of the Government of Nepal pursuant to the prevailing law.
Product license to be obtained: (1) After the establishment of a drug industry
by obtaining recommendation of the Department pursuant to section 7 and before
the manufacturing of that drug, the drug manufacturer shall obtain the product
license from the Department as prescribed, by paying the prescribed fees.
(2) Any drug industry which has already been established prior to the
commencement of this Act shall also obtain the product license pursuant to Subsection (1), -------- by paying the prescribed fees.
Registration of drug: (1) Any drug manufacturing industry shall, prior to the
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
 Deleted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
sale and distribution of each drug manufactured by it, register the drug with the
Department, as prescribed, and obtain the drug registration certificate, by paying
the prescribed fees.
Any person who intends to import a drug shall, prior to its
importation, get each drug of a licensed company which it intends to import
registered with the Department, as prescribed, and obtain the registration license,
by paying the prescribed fees.
Recommendation letter to be obtained for exportation or importation
of drug: Any person who intends to export or import a drug shall, prior to
obtaining the export or import license pursuant to the prevailing law, obtain a
recommendation letter from the Department, as prescribed, on payment of the
prescribed fees.
Registration of name for sale and distribution of drug: Any person who
sells and distributes a drug shall get his/her name and shop or firm registered with
the Department, as prescribed, and obtain a certificate, on payment of the
prescribed fees.
♦10A. Sale and distribution of registered drugs only: Any person who has obtained
the certificate pursuant to Section 10 shall sell and distribute only the drugs
registered pursuant to Section 8A.
♣11. Validity period and renewal of product license, recommendation letter
and certificate: (1) The license as referred to in Section 8, the certificate as
referred to in section 8A♦, the recommendation letter as referred to in Section 9
and the certificate as referred to in section 10 shall remain valid for two years from
the date of its issue.
(2) Each license, recommendation letter and certificate shall be got
 Inserted by the First Amendmend .
 Inserted by the First Amendmend .
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♣ Amended by the First Amendment.
renewed for each year within thirty five days of the expiry of its validity period.
♦(3) If the renewal is not made within the specified time limit pursuant to
Sub-section (1), and an application is made, setting out the reasons for the
failure to have renewal, within thee months after the date of expiry of the time
limit, the Department shall make renewal by charging an additional fee of twenty
five percent of the renewal fee. The license, recommendation letter or certificate
not renewed even within that time limit shall ipso facto be invalid.

Chapter5
Quality Standard of Drugs
Drugs to be safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality
standard: Each drug shall be safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality
standard in such a manner as to keep on maintaining its prescribed quality standard.
Prohibition on manufacture, sale, distribution, export, import, storage
or consumption of drug not conforming to prescribed standard: No
person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, export, import, store, or cause to do
same or cause the consumption of, a drug which is not safe for public
consumption, efficacious and of quality standard.
Return of drug which is not safe for public consumption, efficacious and
of quality standard: (1) If a drug which has already been marketed for sale and
distribution is not safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality standard
pursuant to Section 12, the manufacturer or his/her agent shall get back such drug
from the seller or distributor.
If it comes to the knowledge of the Administrator in any manner that
a drug which is not safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality
standard has been marketed for sale and distribution, he/she may cause the seller or
distributor of the drug to return the drug to its manufacturer.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Provision of compensation: If a drug manufactured in such a manner that it is
not safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality standard results in the
death of, or causes injury to the health of any person, the drug manufacturer shall
be responsible for it and provide compensation, as prescribed, to the successor to
the deceased for such death and to that person in the event of such injury.
16. Submission of letter of guarantee to Department: A drug manufacturer
him/herself or his/her authorized agent or exporter or importer shall submit to the
Department a certified copy of the document issued by the manufacturer
guaranteeing that the drug registered pursuant to Section 8A is safe for public
consumption, efficacious and of quality standard.
Categorization of drugs: (1) The drugs may be classified into categories or subcategories, as prescribed.
(2) No person shall sell or distribute such drugs without prescription of a
doctor as categorized not to be sold or distributed without such prescription
pursuant to Sub-section (1). The pharmacist or pharmacy assistant♦ or
professional person himself shall sell or distribute such drugs on prescription of a
doctor; and the presence of a pharmacist or pharmacy assistant♦ or professional
person shall be compulsory where a person other than the doctor, pharmacy
assistant♦ or professional person sells or distributes such drugs.
The drugs categorized as to be sold or distributed only in presence of
a pharmacist or pharmacy assistant♦ or professional person or any of them while
making categorization pursuant to Sub-section (2) may be sold or distributed only
by them or in their presence.
Any seller may, based on the experience, sell in a reasonable quantity
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
the drugs other than those categorized pursuant to subsections (2) and (3).
Explanation: “Pharmacist” means a person who has done graduation in
pharmacy or graduation in pharmaceutics or and been recognized by the Drugs
Advisory Committee, "pharmacy assistant" means a person who has passed
certificate level or equivalent in pharmacy♦ and "professional person" means a
person who has possessed the prescribed qualifications and been recognized by the
Drugs Advisory Committee.
Prohibition on misuse or abuse of drugs: (1) No person shall misuse or abuse
drugs.
(2) Sale and distribution of any drug in contravention of the provisions
contained in Sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 17 shall be deemed to have
misused or abused such drug.
Prohibition on false or misleading advertisement of drugs: (1) No person
shall make a false or misleading publicity or advertisement about the use, utility
or efficacy of any drug.
(2) Any person who intends to make publicity or advertisement of any drug
shall obtain the license, as prescribed, from the Department, by paying the fees
prescribed for the same.

Chapter6
Inquiry and Inspection
Powers of Inspector to make inquiry and inspection: (1) The Inspector may
inspect, enquire and search any place where a drug is being manufactured, stored♦
sold, distributed or transported.
If, in making inspection, inquiry or search pursuant to Sub-section
(1), the Inspector suspects that any drug is not safe for public consumption,
efficacious or of quality standard or has a reasonable ground to believe that any
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
activity is being carried out in contravention of this Act or the Rules framed under
this Act, the Inspector may seal the drug which he/she has found, hand over its
custody to its owner, receive a receipt from that owner, withhold such drug and
give order to immediately stop such activity.
If the Inspector makes inspection, inquiry or search pursuant to this
Section or stops a drug or sends sample of that drug for testing, he/she shall submit
a report thereon to the Administrator within three days.
If the drug, which has been withhold by the Inspector pursuant to Subsection (2), is proved, from the analysis or test by a research center, laboratory, hospital,
pharmacy or clinic, that it is not safe for public consumption, efficacious or of quality
standard, such drug may be seized or destroyed by order of the Administrator; and the
Administrator may, while issuing such order, order to cancel the recommendation letter,
product license, certificate or license issued under this Act.
♦(4a) If, in carrying out analysis or test pursuant to Sub-section (4), any drug is
found to be safe for public consumption, efficacious and of quality standard but the
person manufacturing, selling, distributing, storing, transporting, exporting or importing
such drug is held to have committed any activity in violation of this Act or the Rules
framed under this Act, the Administrator may seize such drug and control the
manufacturing, sale, distribution, storage, transportation, export or import of such drug or
suspend the license or certificate or recommendation letter of such person for a period not
exceeding six months.
(5) The manufacturer shall bear the expenditures incurred in destroying the drug
pursuant to Sub-section (4) If the drug seized from the seller and stopped is to be
destroyed, the value of such drug received by the manufacture from the seller shall also be
got reimbursed by the manufacturer to the seller.
♦(6) The Department may, as per necessity, depute any expert in the concerned
subject to assist in the inquiry and inspection as referred to in this section.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Filing complaint against order of Administrator: (1) A person who is not
satisfied with an order issued by the Administrator to cancel or suspend the product
license, recommendation letter, certificate or license pursuant to Sub-section (4)
and (4a) of section 20 may file a complaint before the Secretary at the Ministry of
Health within thirty five days after the date of receipt of such order.
(2) The complaint filed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be decided within
three months.
Procedures to be followed while making inspection or inquiry: The
methods and procedures, as prescribed, shall be followed while making inspection,
inquiry and search under this Act.
Qualifications of Inspector and Analyst: (1) The Inspector shall possess the
following qualifications:
(a) Graduation in pharmacy, or
(b) -----
(c) -----
 (d) Having passed certificate level or equivalent in pharmacy and
gained at least five years of experience in pharmacy related works.
(2) The Analyst shall possess the following qualifications:
(a) Graduation in pharmacy, or
♦(a1) Master's degree in chemistry, or
(b) Graduation in chemistry and gained at least three years of
experiences in drug analysis.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♣ Amended by the First Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
 Deleted by the Second Amendment.
 Deleted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
Sending sample of drug for test: The Inspector shall send the sample of a drug,
which has been withheld or seized in the course of inspection or inquiry, to the
research center, laboratory, hospital, dispensary or clinic, as prescribed, for test or
analysis; and the Analyst shall also carry out necessary test or analysis and send a
report thereof to the Administrator, as prescribed.

Chapter7
Miscellaneous
Powers of Government of Nepal to prohibit manufacture, sale,
distribution, storage, transportation, export, import or consumption of
drugs: If Government of Nepal thinks it necessary to prohibit the manufacture,
sale, distribution, storage, transportation, export, import or consumption of any
drug, it may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, issue order to prohibit the
manufacture, sale, distribution, storage, transportation, export, import or
consumption of such drugs.
Powers to fix price of drug: The Department may, if it deems necessary, fix the
price of any drug, by obtaining approval of the Government of Nepal. If the Department
so fixes the price of any drug, a notice thereof shall be published in the Nepal Gazette♦.
 27. Provisions relating to prescription: The provisions relating to the issuance of
prescription by the prescribed doctor or recognized (integrated) doctor or health
worker about the drugs categorized pursuant to Section 17 shall be as prescribed.
Prohibition on manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensing or storage
without making arrangement of required human resource♦ or
resources: No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, dispensing, store, export
or import any drug without adequately arranging such human resource and
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Inserted by the First Amendmend .
other♦ necessary materials related with such activity as prescribed for the
manufacture, sale, distribution, dispensing, storage, export or import of such
drug.
Prohibition on adulteration in drugs and sale of adulterated drugs: (1)
No person shall adulterate any drug so as to root out or lessen or change its effect
or be injurious or sell or offer to sell such drug or dispense it to any one for
treatment with knowledge of such adulteration.
No person shall sell any other substance representing it to be a drug.
Prohibition on sale or distribution of date expired drugs: No person shall
sell or distribute any drug which is date expired.
License to be obtained from Department for clinical trial of new drug:
Any person who intends to carry out a clinical trial of any new drug shall obtain license
from the Department, as prescribed, for such trial.
Explanation: For purposes of this section “clinical trial” means the testing of a new drug
by administering it to any patient or other person with his/her consent in a hospital or
similar other clinic as prescribed in the license in order to ascertain whether it is
appropriate to bring that drug into use.
Disclosure of system of drug and other particulars while manufacturing
drug: (1) While manufacturing any drug, its label shall set out the matter which of
the Allopathic, Ayurvedic, Homeopathic or Unani systems that drug belongs to.
While manufacturing any drug, the possible side effects from the
consumption of that drug shall be mentioned as prescribed.
Narcotic and poisonous drug to be kept safely: (1) A clear label shall be
put on the prescribed narcotic and poisonous drug, and such drug shall be kept
safely.
(2) Any person who sells and distributes the narcotic and poisonous drugs
as referred to in Sub-section (1) shall maintain records of the narcotic and
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Inserted by the First Amendment .
poisonous drug sold or distributed by him/her in the prescribed format; and a
prescription relating to such narcotic and poisonous drug written by a doctor shall
be attached with such records.
Penalties: (1) Any person who violates Chapter 4 or an order as referred to in section 25
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding Twenty Five Thousand Rupees or with both.
Any person who makes an improper use of or misuses a drug
contrary to Section 18♦ or adulterates a drug or sells an adulterated drug or sells
any other substance representing it to be a drug contrary to section 29 or sells or
distributes a date-expired drug contrary to section 30 or does any act contrary to

section 33 shall be punished as follows:
in the event of the possibilit y of a risk of claiming life, life
imprisonment or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and
a fine;
(b) in the event of the possibility of disempowerment or deprival of
capacity of any organ of the body, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years and a fine; and
in other conditions, imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years
or a fine or both.
(3) Except as mentioned in Sub-sections (1) and (2), a person who commits
any act contrary to this Act or the Rules framed under this Act shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding
Five Thousand Rupees or both.
Ceiling of fine and imprisonment in lieu of fine: (1) For the purpose of
imposing a fine pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 34, such fine shall not exceed the
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
amount in controversy (Bigo) or One Hundred Thousand Rupees whichever is higher.
Provided, however, that such excessive fine shall not be set as is not suitable to the
condition of an offender or the circumstance of the offence.
While setting the punishment of fine pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
judicial authority shall also specify in his/her decision the term of imprisonment, in
lieu of the fine, which the offender has to serve for his/her failure to pay that fine.
Where the punishment of fine is imposed for an offence and there is
also a provision of punishment of imprisonment for such offense, punishment of
imprisonment shall not be set for a term exceeding five years for the failure to pay
the fine under Sub-section (2). If punishment of life imprisonment is imposed, no
additional imprisonment shall be imposed.
Right to register patent of drug: The right related with the registration of patent of
a drug shall be as per the prevailing law.
Delegation of authority: Government of Nepal may delegate to any official all or
any of the powers conferred to the Administrator pursuant to this Act.
Government to be the plaintiff : Government of Nepal shall be plaintiff in the
cases of under this Act.
Investigation and filing of case: (1) The Inspector shall investigate any case related
with an offense punishable under this Act and file the case with the Judicial Authority
after completion of such investigation.
♦(1a) In investigating a case pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Inspector
shall have the powers to arrest a person involved in the offense, search any place
whatever related with the offense, take custody of a document or other goods
related with the offense and execute a deed of public inquiry (sarjamin).
♦(1b) In making investigation pursuant to Sub-sections (1a) and (1b), the
Inspector may get the accused to make deposition and, on reasonable grounds,
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.
release him/her on personal bail, security or guarantee or detain him/her for a
period not exceeding twenty five days, by obtaining prior permission of the
Judicial Authority.
♦(1c) In doing any activity as referred to in Sub-sections (1a) and (1b), the
Inspector may, as per necessity, seek assistance of the police personnel. If such
assistance is sought, the police personnel shall render necessary assistance.
In investigating and filing a case pursuant to Sub-section (1) the
Inspector may seek opinion of the Government Attorney. After the filing of a case,
the Government Attorney shall plead and appeal the case.
Power to frame Rules: Government of Nepal may frame Rules in order to implement
the objectives of this Act.
♦ Inserted by the Second Amendment.

===== SOURCE: Education_Act-(2028).pdf =====

Education Act, 2028 (1971)
Date of Authentication and Publication
2028/5/24 (9 Aug. 1971)
Amending Acts:
Education (First Amendment) Act, 2033 (1976)
2033/7/4
(20 Oct. 1976)
Education (Second Amendment) Act, 2036 (1979)
2036/8/5
(21 Nov. 1979)
Education (Third Amendment) Act, 2037 (1980)
2037/5/26
(11 Sept. 1980)
Some Nepal Act Amendments Act, 2041 (1984)
2041/7/27
(12 Nov. 1984)
Judicial Administration Reform
(Fourth Amendment) Act, 2043 (1986)
2043/7/24
(10 Nov. 1986)
Education (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2045 (1988)
2045/7/10
(26 Oct. 1988)
Education (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2049 (1992)
2049/7/13
(29 Oct. 1992)
Education (Sixth Amendment) Act, 2055 (1998)
2055/10/1
(15 Jan. 1999)
Education (Seventh Amendment) Act, 2058 (2001)
2058-10-25
(7 Feb. 2002)
Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts
Amendment Act, 2063 (2006)
2063-9-14
(29 Dec. 2006)
Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Law
Amendment Act, 2066
2066.10.7
(21 Jan. 2010)
Act No. 8 of the Year 2028 (1971)
An Act Made to Provide for Education to be Given in the Schools
According to the National Education System Plan
1Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to promote quality education through
improvements in the management of existing and future schools all over Nepal
in order to prepare human resource for national development and to maintain
good conduct, decency and morality of the people in general in consonance
with multi-party democratic system,.
Now, therefore, be it enacted by His Majesty King Mahendra Bir
Bikram Shah Dev upon the advice and consent of the Rastriya Panchayat.
Short title, extent and commencement: (1) This Act may be called
"Education Act, 2028 (1971).
(2) This Act shall come into force throughout Nepal.
1 Amended by the Fifth Amendment.
(3) This Act shall come into force at such area and on such date
as appointed by Government of Nepal may, by a Notification in the
Nepal Gazette.Φ
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this
Act, -
"Pre-Primary School" means those schools that provide One
year's pre-primary education to those children that have
completed Four years of their age.
"Primary Education" means education given from class One to
class Five.
4(b1) "Lower Secondary Education" means education to be given from
class Six to class Eight.
.....…
Φ Government of Nepal has implemented this Act to the following district on the following dates:
Dates
Enacted districts:
2028/7/15 (1 Nov. 1971)
Chitwan, Kaski
2029/6/15 (1 Oct. 1972)
Dang, Banke, Baglung, Rupandehi, Dhanusha,
Kavrepalanchok, Saptari, Dhankuta, Morang,
Jhapa, Jumla, Kailali, Kanchanpur.
2030/7/1 (17 Oct. 1973)
Ilam, Panchthar, Terathum, Sankhuwasabha,
Sunsari,
Sindhupalchowk,
Kathmandu,
Bhaktapur,
Lalitpur,
Gorkha,
Manang,
Lamjung, Tanahu, Syangja, Surkhet.
2031/6/21 (7 Oct. 1974)
Solukhumbu, Okhaldhunga, Khotang, Bhojpur,
Udayapur, Siraha, Dolkha, Ramechap, Sindhuli,
Sarlahi, Mahottari, Nuwakot, Mustang, Myagdi,
Parbat, Gulmi, Arghakanchi, Palpa, Nawalparasi,
Kapalbastu.
2032/6/20 (6 Oct. 1975)
Darchula, Baitadi, Daduldhara, Bajhang, Bajura,
Achham, Bara, Parsa, Rautahat, Makwanpur,
Rasuwa, Dhading, Dolpa, Pyuthan, Salyan,
Rukum, Rolpa, Tibrikot, Mugu, Humla, Bardiya,
Dailakh, Jajarkot, Doti.
2 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
3 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
4 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.
5 Deleted by the Fourth Amendment.
"Secondary Education" means education to be given from class
Nine to class Ten.
7(d1) "Special education" means special type of education to be given to
blind, deaf dumb or the children who are physically or mentally
disable.
8(d2) "Community School" means those schools that have obtained
approval or permission and receiving regular grant from
Government of Nepal.
9(d3) "Institutional School" means those schools that have obtained
approval or permission for operation on condition that they are
not receiving regular grants from Government of Nepal.
10(d4) "Higher secondary education" means education given from class
Eleven to class Twelve.
11(e) "School" means the Community School or Institutional School.
12(e1) "Primary School" means a School giving education pursuant to
Clause (b).
13(e2) "Lower Secondary School" means a School giving education
pursuant to Clauses (b) and (b1) or Clause (b1).
14(e3) "Secondary School" means a School giving education pursuant
Clauses (b), (b1) and (d) or Clauses (b1) and (d) or Clause (d).
6 Amended by the Fifth Amendment.
7 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
8 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
9 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
10 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
11 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
12 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment
13 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment
14 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment
15(e4) "Higher Secondary School" means a School imparting education
pursuant to Clause (d4).
"Teacher" means a teacher of a School and this term also
includes the Headmaster.
16(f1) "Commission" means
17……. Teacher Service Commission
constituted pursuant to Section 11B.
18(f2) "Secretariat" means Secretariat of the Commission.
19(f3) "Chairperson" means Chairperson of the Commission.
20(f4) "Member" means member of the Commission and this term also
includes Chairperson of the Commission.
21(f5) "Guardians (Parents)" means those persons who are mentioned as
the guardians of the children at school records.
22(f6) ''Employee '' means any employee working in community school
except the teacher.
"School Leaving Certificate Examination" means the examination
to be held at the end of secondary education.
23(g1) "Primary School Leaving Examination" means examination to be
conducted at the end of Primary education.
15 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
16 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
17 Deleted by the Seventh Amendment.
18 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
19 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
20 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
21 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
22 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
23 Inserted by the Fourth Amendment.
"Prescribed or as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the Rules framed under this Act.
24(i)
"License" means temporary approval, pending the permanent
approval or grant of assistance by Government of Nepal to open a
School or add the classes at any prescribed place or area.
25(j)
"Approval" means the permanent approval given by Government
of Nepal to any School which fulfilled the conditions as
prescribed.
26(k) "Residential School" means a School approved by Government
of Nepal as a Residential School.
27(l)
"Educational Trust" means the
28public or private trust
established by a person without any of profit in order to run the
school.
Permission should be obtained to open the school: (1) If anyone,
except Government of Nepal, intends to open a school, he/she shall
submit an application to Government of Nepal or the prescribed official
with prescribed details and a recommendation letter of the concerned
District Education Office. While submitting an application he/she shall
mention whether the school is to be operated as a Company or an
Educational Trust.
(2) If an application is received pursuant to Sub-clause (1),
Government of Nepal or prescribed official shall make necessary
24 Inserted by the Second Amendment
25 Inserted by the Second Amendment
26 Inserted by the Second Amendment
27 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
28 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
29 Amended by Seventh Amendment.
investigation, and if it is found reasonable, permission to open the
school shall be provided with conditions as prescribed to be fulfilled.
(3) If, it is found that the School has fulfilled the conditions as
prescribed, Government of Nepal or prescribed official shall provide
approval to the school who had obtained permission pursuant to Subclause (2).
30(4) A school, running as an institutional school before 2058
Magha 25 if not registered as a company or an educational trust or not
submitted an application for such registration, shall submit an
application before the prescribed authority upon mentioning the
particulars as prescribed within a period of One year from the date of
commencement of this Sub-section stating whether the school to be
conducted as a company or an educational trust.
(5) If an application is received pursuant to Sub-clause (4), the
prescribed official shall make necessary investigation on the application
and if the request of the school is found reasonable the requesting shall
be given approval to run the school.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (2), (3)
or (5), the following schools shall not be provided permission or
approval to run as a Company:
A School running in the Government or public
buildings,
A School running in the building is constructed on
the Government or public land,
30 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
A School running in the building or land donated
by an individual or an organization to the school,
or by constructing a building on the donated land.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (2), (3)
and (5), the concerned Village Development Committee or the
Municipality shall provide permission or approval to open Pre-primary
Schools which is to be run by its own resources.
31(7a) if a school, which is running in a form of company
pursuant to this Act, intends to be conducted under educational trust,
shall produce an application before the prescribed authority upon
mentioning the particulars as specified after liquidating the company in
accordance with prevailing law.
32(7b) While making an inquiry into an application submitted
pursuant to Sub-section (7a) if it is found reasonable to be conducted
the concerned school under educational trust as per the request of the
applicant, the prescribed authority shall give approval to run such
school under the educational trust.
33(7c) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or
prevailing law, while operating a school under educational trust it
shall be followed as in the following matters;-
The trustees of an educational trust must be in a
form of corporate body;
While running an educational trust, there shall be
at least Five members in public trust and there shall
31 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
32 Inserted b y the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
33 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
be at least Three members in case of a private trust
in the board of trustees,
The account of income and expenditure of an
educational trust shall be maintained in a
prescribed format and such an account shall be
audited by a recognised auditor.
(d) A sitting trustee of an educational trust may specify
his/her successor to act as a trustee during his/her
own life time or after his/her death.
Provided that, while specifying a successor
in the case of a public educational trust the
approval of the Ministry of Education and Sport is
a must.
34(7d) If a social, charitable or welfare institution intends to run a
school without keeping an object of profit may run a school under
public educational trust upon receiving approval of the prescribed
authority.
35(7e) The subjects to be taught, the conditions to be followed by
a school running pursuant to Sub-section (7d) and other provisions
relating to such school shall be as prescribed.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (1), (2),
and (3), permission shall not be provided to anyone to establish a
school affiliated to any foreign educational institution.
Provided that, if an agreement has been concluded with
Government of Nepal to open a school in affiliation with a foreign
Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
35 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
educational institution or diplomatic agency has made recommendation
thereof, Government of Nepal shall provide permission or approval to
run school upon specifying the conditions. An application may directly
be submitted to Government of Nepal to open such school.
(9) If, the school received permission or approval pursuant to
Sub-section (8) is not operated as per the condition, Government of
Nepal may close down such school.
(10) Other provisions of this Act shall not be applicable to the
school received permission or approval pursuant to Sub-section (8).
Operation of the School: The operation of a School shall be as
prescribed.
Conduction and Control of Examination: The conduction and
control of Primary School Leaving Examination, 37Lower Secondary
Leaving Examination and School Leaving Certificate Examination shall
be as prescribed.
Types of Secondary Education: Types of Secondary education shall
be as follows:
General Secondary Education
38(b)
.......
Sanskrit Secondary Education.
396A. Operation of Special Education, Informal Education, and
Distance Education and other provisions: (1) The operation of
Special Education shall be as good as General Education.
36 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
37 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.
38 Deleted by the Fourth Amendment.
40(2) The terms, conditions of service and the provision of the
staff members and teachers working at present or to be appointed to run
special education shall be as prescribed.
(3) The operation of informal education and distance education
shall be as prescribed.
417. Medium of Language: (1) The medium of education in a school shall
be Nepali language, English language or both languages.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1) the
medium of education in a school may be as follows in following
conditions:
(a) The education up to primary level may be imparted
in the mother tongue.
(b) A noncitizen of Nepal, while studying at a school
in Nepal, may study any other language subject
instead of Nepali subject.
(c) While teaching a language subject in a school the
medium of education may be the same language.
(d) While teaching a compulsory subject of English
language, the medium of education shall be
English.
Curriculum and Textbook of the School: The School shall be
required to implement the curriculum and text-book as approved by
Government of Nepal.
39 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment
40 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
41 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
428A. Department of Education: (1) There shall be Department of
Education under the Ministry of Education and Sports.
(2) There shall be Director General as the chief in the
Department of Education pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The functions, duties, and rights of the Director General shall
be as prescribed.
Regional Education Directorate: (1) Government of Nepal may
establish Regional Education Directorate in each development region.
(2) A Regional Education Director shall be the Chief of the
44directorate to be established pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the Regional Education
Director shall be as prescribed.
4510. District Education Office: (1) Government of Nepal may establish
District Education Office in each district.
(2) District Education Officer shall be the Chief of the Office to
be established pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the District Education
Officer shall be as prescribed.
4611. The formation of District Education Committee: (1) The District
Education Committee shall be constituted in each district to supervise
and manage the schools within the district.
42 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
43 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
44 Amended by the Fifth Amendment.
45 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
46 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
(2) There shall be following members in the District Education
Committee pursuant to Sub-section (1):
President of the District Development
Committee or the person authorized
to perform the duties of the President
-Chairperson
47(b) Chief District Officer
- Member
Secretary to the District Development
Committee
- Member
48................
Four teachers nominated by the
District
Education
Committee
including
49Two
women
amongst representing from the Higher
Secondary
Schools,
Secondary
Schools, and Primary Schools of the
District, with at least Ten years'
experience of working with the
concerned school
- Member
person
amongst
chairpersons
Community
School Management Committee of
the district nominated by the District
Education Committee
- Member
47 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
48 Deleted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
49 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
person
amongst
Chairpersons of the Institutional
School Management Committee of
the district nominated by District
education Officer
- Member
person
amongst
Chairpersons of Village Education
Committee nominated by District
Education Committee
President of the District Level
Teachers' Union
- Member
District Education Officer
-Member Secretary
(3) The tenure of office of the Members nominated pursuant to
Sub-section (2) shall be Two years. If the nominated member did not
fulfill the conduct as required by the post, the nominating official may
remove him/her from the post, at any time.
Provided that, one shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
defend before removing from the post.
(4) 50....................
(5) The functions, duties and powers of the District Education
Committee will be as follow:
To formulate district level education plans,
51(a1) To recommend to Higher Secondary Education
Board to provide affiliation to run a Higher
Secondary School,
To encourage the Village Development Committee
and Municipality to provide financial assistance to
the Community Schools,
To assist in conducting the examinations in the
district in a dignified and fair manner,
To manage for accumulating resources for the
development of quality education in the district,
To fix the remuneration for the auditor of the
Community School,
To distribute and adjust the teachers' positions
available among the Community Schools of the
district, on the basis of the number of the students
of the Primary School; and on the basis of the
number of the students and subject load of the
Lower Secondary and Secondary Schools in
accordance of the policy of Government of Nepal,
To provide instructions to the School Management
Committee as required.
(6) Other functions, duties, powers and procedures of meetings of
the District Education Committee shall be as prescribed.
5211A. District Education Committee May be Dissolved: (1) In case, the
District Education Committee of any district fails to fulfill the
responsibilities as prescribed, such District Education Committee may
be dissolved by Government of Nepal.
50 Deleted by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Acts, 2066.
51 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
52 Inserted by the Third Amendment.
(2) After the dissolution of a District Education Committee
pursuant to Sub-section (1), Government of Nepal may constitute a
temporary Committee to perform the functions of the District Education
Committee until the constitution of another District Education
Committee.
5311B. Constitution of the Commission:
54(1) A Teacher Service
Commission shall be constituted to appoint teachers in the vacant
positions in accordance with the positions approved by Government of
Nepal for the Community Schools and to recommend the promotion of
such teachers as appointed in such post.
55Provided that, the appointment and promotion of teachers in a
community school which is handled by a local body or management
committee pursuant to Section 11M. shall be as prescribed.
56(2) The Commission shall have other Two members along with
the President.
57(3) In order to recommend for the appointment of the members
pursuant to Sub-section (2), Government of Nepal shall constitute a
committee under the Chairpersonship of the Chairperson of the Public
Service Commission consisting the Vice-chancellor of Tribhuvan
University and the Secretary at the Ministry of Education and Sports as
a member, and Government of Nepal shall appoint the person
recommended by the Committee as a member.
53 Amended by the Sixth Amendment.
54 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
55 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
56 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
57 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
(4) The tenure of Office of members appointed 58...............
pursuant to Sub-section (2) shall be Five years and he/she may be reappointed.
59(4a) The senior official of the Commission shall function as the
secretary of the Commission.
(5) The functions, duties, powers and proceedings of the
commission shall be as prescribed.
(6) Other conditions of service of members shall be as prescribed.
(7) Remuneration and facilities of the members shall be as
prescribed by Government of Nepal, by a Notification in the Nepal
Gazette.
6011C. Qualification for Member: (1) The following qualifications shall be
required to be appointed as a member:
Nepalese citizen,
Obtained Masters' degree from the University
recognized by Government of Nepal,
Should not have to be a member of any Political
Party from at least Two years before the
appointment,
Completion of the age of Forty years,
61(e) At least Five years' service in special class of
Government of Nepal for the Chairperson and at
58 Deleted by the Seventh Amendment.
59 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment
60 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
61 Amended by the Seventh Amendment
least Fifteen years' of experience in the field of
Law, Education or Administration for a member.
6211D. Member not to be Maintained: (1) The post of member shall be
deemed vacant in the following circumstances:
If the tenure pursuant to Sub-section (4) of Section
11B expires,
If he/she has completes the age of Sixty Five years,
If the resignation in writing tendered by him/her is
accepted by Government of Nepal,
If he/she dies.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (4) of

Section 11B., if someone files a complaint referring that a member is
incompetent or has not act as required by his/her duty or has a bad
conduct, Government of Nepal may, constitute a Committee to make
investigation on such complaint; and Government of Nepal may remove
such member it is so proved.
Provided that, one shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
defend before removing from the post.
6311E. Provision Relating to Secretariat and Employee: (1) There shall be
a separate Secretariat of the Commission and such Secretariat shall be
located in Kathmandu Valley.
(2) Government of Nepal shall designate at least Gazetted First
Class Officer of Government of Nepal to carry out the function as a
Administrative Chief of the Secretariat.
62 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
63 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
(3) Other necessary employees of the Secretariat shall be
arranged by the Ministry of Education.
6411F.Procedures to be Followed for Recommendation: (1) The
procedures to be followed for the recommendation to permanent
appointment of teachers by the Commission shall be as follows:
To collect the details of number of teachers to be
fulfilled according to the level of School from the
concerned District Education Office while fulfilling
the vacant post of teachers permanently as per the
approved position in the Schools of the district,
To publish advertisement for recruitment through
open competition upon mentioning the number of
posts, and receive application from the candidates
who deserve the prescribed qualifications for the
given post,
65Provided that, while determining the
number of post for such open competition the
commission may make necessary arrangements in
such a manner that Fifty percent posts, only the
following person, in maximum, shall be eligible to
be a candidate in the first vacancy announcement
(advertisement) made by the commission after 21
Shrawan 2061 B.S.:
(1) A person who has served for at least
One year in the capacity of a
temporary
teacher
among
64 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
65 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
persons who have been removed from
the post of temporary teacher after
the appointment of permanent teacher
in such post as per the advertisement
published in the year of 2052 B. S.
(2) A person who has been appointed in
the post
of teacher at community
school before 25 Magha 2058 B.S.
and serving continuously since then.
To select suitable candidate as follows upon
making an inquiry of the applications received
pursuant to Clause (b):
Open competitive written examination,
Interview,
Practical examination.
Provided that, practical examination
shall be taken only in such situation as
deemed appropriate and necessary by the
Commission.
66(d) To publish advertisement every year for the vacant
post and to recommend for appointment or
promotion within a period of Six months of such
advertisement.
67(1a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Clause (b) of Subsection (1), the commission shall make arrangement of open competition
66 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
as prescribed in such a manner that even the temporary teachers, who
have been serving continuously on the commencement of this Subsection and who have been appointed till 10 Baisakh 2063 B.S. in a
seat approved by the Government of Nepal for community school or
appointed as a temporary teacher on the lean post of the approved
ceiling may be eligible to be a candidate in the first advertisement
(vacancy announcement) to be published after the commencement of
this Sub-section. In the case of temporary teachers no age bar shall be
applied for the first time.
68(1b) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Clause (b) of
Sub-section (1), the commission, except as provided in Sub-section (1a),
may provide the arrangement for an open competition as prescribed in
such a manner that on the commencement of this Sub-section who has
been working as a temporary teacher under basic and primary education
project and also the person who has been removed from the post of a
teacher while fulfilling the vacant post of a permanent teacher as per the
advertisement of the years of 2052 B.S. and 2061/062 B.S., may be
eligible to be a candidate in such a competition. In the case of a
temporary teacher no age bar shall be applied for the first time.
69(1c) The Government of Nepal may provide facility as
prescribed to those teachers who had served for more than Five years as
a temporary teacher from among who could not be a permanent teacher
through a competition made pursuant to the Sub-section (1a) and (1b).
(2) The Commission shall follow the prescribed procedures while
recommending for the promotion of a teacher.
67 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
68 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
69 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
7011G. Committee may be Constituted: (1) The Commission may constitute
Committees in central and regional level as per necessity for the smooth
operation of functions and proceedings to be carried out by it. The
members of such Committees shall be from amongst the educationist
and the persons actively involved in the education sector who are not
members of any political party from at least One year before the
appointment.
(2) The functions, duties, powers and proceedings of the
Committees constituted pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be as
prescribed by the Commission.
7111H. Delegation of Powers: The Commission may, as per necessity,
delegate any of the powers conferred on it by this Act to the
Chairperson, member, the Committee pursuant to Section 11G. or 72any
officer employee.
7311I. Deemed to have done by the Commission: The functions and
proceedings carried out by the District Teachers Selection Committee
and Regional Teachers Selection Committee prior to the commencement
of this Act shall be considered as carried out by the Commission.
7411J. Submission of Annual Report: The Commission shall submit its
annual progress report upon mentioning the functions and proceedings
carried out by it to the Government of Nepal, within Three months of
the expiry of every fiscal year.
7511K.Village Education Committee: (1) The Village Education Committee
shall be constituted in each Village Development Committee to
70 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
71 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
72 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
73 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
74 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
supervise and manage the school to be run and to establish
coordination among the various schools within the area of the Village
Development Committee upon consisting of the following Members:-
President
Village
Development Committee or the person
authorized to act as a President.
-Chairperson
One person nominated by the District
Education Committee from amongst the
Chairperson of the School Management
Committees of the schools running
within
Village
Development
Committee area.
-Member
(c ) Two persons, including One woman,
from amongst the social workers or
educationists nominated by Village
Education Committee
-Member
School supervisor from the concerned
-Member
member
District
Development Committee of the area
where the school is located
-Member
A Headmaster from the excellent
school
evaluated
Village
Education
Committee
among
Community Schools operated within
the Village Development Committee
area.
-Member-Secretary
(2) The tenure of the Members nominated pursuant to Subsection (1) shall be Two years. If it is found that the nominated member
did not maintained the conduct required to his/her post, the nominating
official may remove him/her from his/her post at any time.
Provided that, one shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
defend before removing from the post.
(3) Other functions, powers, duties of the Village Education
Committee and the other procedures of meetings shall be as prescribed.
7611L. Mobile Schools may be operated: Government of Nepal may operate
Mobile Schools in the remote mountainous (Himalayan) regions as
prescribed.
7711M.Teaching License to be obtained: (1) After the commencement of
this Act, no one shall be the candidate for the post of a teacher without
obtaining teaching license from the Commission.
(2) The Commission may conduct examination as prescribed for
the purpose of providing Teaching License through the public notice.
(3) The Commission shall provide Teaching License to those
candidates who have passed the examination conducted pursuant to
Sub-section (2).
(4) The Commission shall provide temporary Teaching License to
the working teachers within Six months of the commencement of this
(5) The teachers who have obtained temporary Teaching License
pursuant to Sub-section (4) shall have to obtain permanent license from
the Commission within Five years.
76 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
(6) The temporary teachers who fail to obtain permanent
Teaching License within the period as referred to in Sub-section (5)
shall automatically be terminated and the permanent teachers shall be
terminated as prescribed.
78(6a) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in a condition where teaching license holder persons are not
available in the subject of Science, Mathematics and English and due to
this reason if teaching activities have not been conducted in the schools
of remote areas, or temporary teachers who have not taken teaching
license, the commission may conduct separate examination for them as
prescribed for the purpose of giving a chance of participation in a
competition to be held as per the first advertisement after the
commencement of this Sub-section; and provide temporary teaching
license.
79(6b) Among temporary teaching licenses pursuant to Subsection (6a), the duration of teaching license which is issued to teach in
remote areas shall be for Two years and the duration of a teaching
license which is issued to participate in the competition shall be for One
year.
(7) Other provisions regarding the Teaching License shall be as
prescribed.
8011N. Grant shall not be curtailed: The amount of grant being provided by
Government of Nepal to the Community Schools at the commencement
of this Act shall not be curtailed.
77 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
78 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
79 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
80 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
81Provided that, the amount of grant being provided to a school
may be reduced as prescribed if the school has been unable to maintain
academic standards as prescribed.
8211O. Provisions for scholarship may be made: Government of Nepal may
arrange scholarship as prescribed to the students enrolled at Lower
Secondary Education and Secondary Education.
8311P. Grants may be provided to the Child Development Centre:
Government of Nepal may provide grants as prescribed to the Child
Development Centre established in co-operation with Village
Development Committee or Municipality.
8411Q. Management of a school may be handled: (1) If a local body or
management committee intends to handle the management of a
community school, it shall produce an application before the prescribed
authority upon mentioning the matters as prescribed.
(2) While making an inquiry into the application received
pursuant to Sub-section (1), if it is found that such local body or
management committee has fulfilled the prescribed conditions, the
prescribed authority may handover the management of such community
school to the applicant.
(3) The terms and conditions of service and facilities of the
teachers, who have been appointed in the post approved by the
Government of Nepal and have been working in a school whose
management is handled by local body or management committee
pursuant to Sub-section (2), shall be as good as the teachers of other
community schools and the Government of Nepal shall provide amount
81 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
82 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
83 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
84 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
for salary and allowances of such teachers and the amount which is
equal to the amount to be added by a school for provident fund, to a
school in a single installment.
(4) The local body or management committee may appoint
additional teacher in a school which is handled by it pursuant to Subsection (2) to be paid by such school.
(5) A teacher appointed pursuant to Sub-section (4) shall be
entitled to obtain remuneration and facilities as good as the other
teachers of such school.
(6) The Government of Nepal may provide additional seat to a
school whose management is handled by local body or management
committee pursuant to Sub-section (2) on the basis of necessity of such
school.
8512. School Management Committee: (1) To operate, supervise and
manage every community school; there shall be a School Management
Committee consisting of the following members:
A person selected by the parents
from among themselves
-Chairperson
Three persons, including One
woman, selected by the parents
among themselves
-Member
The Ward President of the
concerned Ward of the Village
Development
Committee
Municipality where the school is
- Member
85 Amended by the Seventh Amendment
located
One person nominated by School
Management
Committee
among
local
intellectuals
educationists
- Member
One person nominated by School
Management
Committee
86amongst the founders of the
school
- Member
87(e1) One person nominated by School
Management
Committee
amongst the donors who have
provided amount, building or
land to the school as prescribed
- Member
One person selected by the
concerned school teachers from
amongst themselves
-Member
Headmaster of the school
Member-secretary
(2) Two members shall be represented from the District Level
Federation of Industry and Commerce in the School Management
Committees of such Secondary schools where study or training on
Technical or vocational Subjects are conducted.
(3) The School Supervisors and the Resource Persons related to
the concerned school shall be invited to attend the School Management
Committee Meetings as observers.
86 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
87 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
(4) There shall be School Management Committee for operation,
supervision and management in every Institutional School consisting the
following members: -
One person nominated by the
District Education Officer on the
recommendation
concerned
school from amongst the Founder
or the Investor of the school.
-Chairperson
Two persons including a woman
nominated by School Management
Committee
amongst
parents.
- Member
One person from amongst the local
intellectuals
educationists
nominated
Village
Development
Community
Municipality
- Member
School
supervisor
concerned area
- Member
person
selected
concerned school teachers from
amongst themselves
- Member
The Headmaster of the school
- Member Secretary
(5) The tenure of the office of the President or Members selected
or nominated pursuant to Sub-sections (1) and (4) shall be 88Three
years. If it is found that the nominated chairperson or member did not
fulfill the conduct as per his/her post, the nominating guardian, official
or body may remove him/her from his/her post at any time.
Provided that, one shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
defend before removing from the post.
89(5a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (4) if
it is found necessary to form School Management Committee of any
institutional school by the Government of Nepal to which the
Government of Nepal has provided building or land or has given any
type of assistance, or such school has been conducted for special
purpose or conducts special education; the Ministry of Education and
Sports upon mentioning the reasons thereof may form a School
Management Committee.
(6) The functions, rights, and duties of the School Management
Committee for the Community Schools shall be as follows:
To mobilize the resources and means available for
the operation of the school,
To maintain or cause to maintain the records of the
movable and immovable property of the school and
protect them,
To maintain and update the records of the
academic, physical and financial data and details of
the school,
88 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
89 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
To approve the annual budget of the school and
inform the same to the Village Education
Committee and District Education Office,
To prevent from polluting the environment of the
school on the grounds of politics, religion,
communality in order to maintain the academic
environment of the school conducive,
To assign duties to the teacher deputed by the
District Education Office,
To carry out the annual audit of the school by the
auditor appointed by the District Education Office,
To take necessary action in accordance with the
auditor's report and submit such report to the
District Education Office,
To abide by the orders and instructions issued by
the District Education Committee and District
Education Office,
90(j)
To arrange for the remuneration and facilities of the
teachers who have been appointed or promoted by
the committee itself,
constitute Teacher-Parent Association as
specified in order to enhance the academic
standards.
(7) The functions, duties and powers of the School Management
Committee of the Institutional School shall be as follows:
90 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
To mobilize the resources and means available for
the operation of the school,
To make arrangement for the essential physical
facilities for the school,
To protect and safeguard the movable and
immovable property of the school,
To maintain conducive educational environment in
the school,
To implement the curriculum and the textbooks
compulsorily as approved by Government of Nepal
obtain
approval
Curriculum
Development
Center
other supplementary
textbooks are regarded essential,
To appoint those candidates to the post of the
teacher who have obtained License from the
Commission and who are eligible for the post as per
the prevailing law to the post of a teacher,
91(f1) To start with the process relating to permanent
fulfillment within a period of Six months from the
date of the commencement of this Clause for the
purpose of providing chance to be a permanent
teacher to those teachers who have been appointed
as temporary teachers before the commencement of
this Clause and to start with such process for those
teachers within a period of Six months from the
91 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
date of being appointed as a temporary teacher after
the commencement of this Clause,
To provide salary to the teacher not less than the
scale fixed by Government of Nepal,
To take disciplinary action to the teachers,
To abide directions issued by Government of
Nepal.
92(7a) There shall be a School Management Committee as
prescribed in a higher secondary school for its operation, supervision
and management.
93(7b) The functions, duties and powers of a School Management
Committee formed pursuant to Sub-section (7a) shall be as prescribed.
(8) Other functions, powers, and duties and the procedures of
meetings of a School Management Committee shall be as prescribed.
9412A.School Management Committee may be dissolved: (1) In a
condition where the School Management Committee of any school
becomes unable to fulfill its prescribed responsibility the District
Education Office may, upon mentioning the reasons thereof, dissolve
such school management committee.
Provided that, the School Management Committee shall be given
a reasonable opportunity to defend prior to its dissolution.
(2) After the dissolution of the School Management Committee
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the District Education Committee may form
92 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
93 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
94 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
a temporary School Management Committee until a next School
Management Committee is formed or owning to any other reason until a
School Management Committee in constituted.
9512B Rural Education Development Fund: (1) There shall be a Rural
Education development Fund in the central level to assist in the
development of the Community Schools run in the rural areas and also
to enhance their academic standards.
(2) The fund as of Sub-section (1) shall consist of the following
amounts:
The amounts received as grants from Government
of Nepal,
The amount received from the Institutional out of
96.............. the total annual income of such school
as prescribed,
The amount received as donation,
The amount received from other sources.
9712C. The Fund Management Committee: (1) There shall be a Fund
Management Committee in order to operate the Rural Education
Development Fund, consisting of the following Members:-
Secretary, Ministry of Education
and Sports
- Chairperson
Representative, Ministry of Finance
- Member
95 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
96 Deleted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
97 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
Representative, Ministry of Local
Development
- Member
Joint-Secretary
(Educational
Administration Division), Ministry
of Education and Sports
- Member
Director General, Department of
Education
- Member
Representative,
Office
Financial Comptroller General
- Member
Two persons nominated by the
Ministry of Education and Sports
from amongst the presidents of the
central level organizations of the
Institutional Schools
- Member
Head of the School Administration
Section
Ministry
Education and Sports
- Member-Secretary
(2) Other functions, duties, powers and procedures of the
meetings of the Fund Management Committee instituted pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall be prescribed.
District Education Fund: (1) There shall be a District Education
Fund in each district, which shall consist of the following amount:
The grants received from Government of Nepal,
98(a1) The amount received as donation from the District
Development Committee,
99 .....................
The amount received from education tax,
The amount received as donation, and
The amount received from other sources.
(2) The Fund established pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be
operated as prescribed.
100.........................
101(3) The Fund pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be audited by
the Department of Auditor General.
10213A.Fund of the School: (1) There shall be a School Fund in each School,
which shall consist of the following amounts:
The grants received from Government of Nepal,
103(a1)
The grants received from District Education Fund,
104(a2) The grants received from Village Development
Committee or Municipality,
The amount to be collected from fees,
The amount received as donation or gift, and
98 Amendment by the Fifth Amendment.
99 Deleted by the Third Amendment.
100 Proviso deleted by the Fourth Amendment
101 Inserted by the Third Amendment.
102 Inserted by the Third Amendment.
103 Inserted by the Fourth Amendment.
The amount received from other sources.
(2) The Fund established pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be
operated and audited as prescribed.
10514. Government of Nepal May Give Directives: (1) Government of
Nepal may, as per necessity, give directives to the District Education
Committee 106 ………… and School Management Committee.
(2) It shall be the duty of each District Education Committee and
107… … … School Management Committee to abide by the directives
pursuant to Sub-section (1).
Power of Government of Nepal to Shift, Merge, Re-name or
Close any School: 108 .........Government of Nepal or the prescribed
official may, upon recommendation of the District Education
Committee, shift any existing School from one place to another or
merge two or more Schools into one School or rename the School or
close such School, 109or open a new School at the prescribed place or
area or give permission or approval to operate the School with addition
of classes.
11016. Property of the School: (1) The assets under the ownership of a
Community School shall be considered to be the public property. The
amount received through the sale of the property of such Community
Schools after the cancellation of permission pursuant to this Act or
merging into any other school by Government of Nepal as per the
104 Amendment by the Fifth Amendment.
105 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
106 Deleted by the Sixth Amendment
107 Deleted by the Sixth Amendment.
108 Deleted by the Second Amendment.
109 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
110 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
prevailing law, shall be deposited to the concerned District Education
Fund if such property is not be used by any other schools.
111(2) The property of the institutional school which is being
conducted under educational trust, shall be in the name of the same
school.
112(2a) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (2),
the educational trust or a trustee of such trust may transfer the total or
partial share of his/her own investment to a successor as prescribed.
113(2b) In a condition where a school conducting under
educational trust, is closed for some reason, out of the property
remaining in the name of such school the property of the school
conducted under public trust, shall be a public property and the
Government of Nepal may bring such property in the use of the work of
any community school or educational institution; and in a condition
where the property of a school conducted under private trust is not
transmitted to any other person pursuant to Sub-section (2a) the then
trustee of such trust may transfer such property to a school or
educational institution as prescribed.
114(2c) In a condition where the trustee of the private trust does
not transmit the property so concerned to any school or educational
institution pursuant to Sub-section (2b) or such trust does not have
trustee at all, the Government of Nepal may provide the property
remaining in the name of such school to any community school, or any
educational institution.
111 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063
112 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
113 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
114 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
(3) The property of the Institutional Schools, run as a Company,
shall be in the name of that company.
(4) While receiving any kind of movable or immovable property
from a person or organization, the Institutional School shall obtain
approval from the concerned District Education Committee.
Provided that, for receiving any kind of movable or immovable
property from a foreign person or organization a prior approval of
Government of Nepal shall be obtained.
(5) The property received pursuant to Sub-section (4) shall not
sold (transacted) without the approval of Government of Nepal.
11516A.Exemption and facility to the school: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in prevailing law, no registration fees shall be exacted on the
registration of any kind of deeds written in the names of Community
School, and Institutional Schools operated as an Educational Trust.
(2) Except as provided in Sub-section (1), Government of Nepal
may provide exemption in the registration of deeds as prescribed to
other schools.
(3) The other exemption and facilities to be provided to the
Community Schools and the Institutional Schools operated as
Education Trust shall be as prescribed.
11616B Cancellation of permission or approval: If, any Institutional School
fails to provide the report pursuant to Sub-sections (4) of Section 3, or
conducts against this Act or Rules made thereunder, the prescribed
official shall cancel the permission or approval of such school.
115 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
116 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
Provided that, the concerned school shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to defend before canceling the permission or approval.
11716C. Classification of schools: The classification of school shall be as
prescribed.
11816D. Provision relating to fee: (1) The education of the Primary level of
Community Schools shall be free and Government of Nepal shall
provide textbook free of cost to the students enrolled in such schools.
(2) The fees to be charged on the students studying in Lower
Secondary and Secondary level at Community Schools shall be as
prescribed.
Provided that, a provision of free education in the Community
School shall be provided to Dalits, Janjati and girl children and other
students who are below the poverty line.
(3) Once the school charges admission fees to the students while
getting admission in a particular class, the same school shall not collect
any kind of fees from the same student while getting readmission to
another class.
(4) The school shall not collect any kind of fees from the
students to build the physical infrastructure of the school.
119(5) A institutional school shall determine the fees, that is
permitted to be collected from its students, only after the approval of
the prescribed authority. In the course of giving an approval in respect
of the determination of the fees, the prescribed authority shall give
117 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
118 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
119 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
approval on the basis of the facilities provided by such school to the
students.
(6) If, any school collects fees from the students against this Act,
the prescribed official shall make arrangement to return such fee to the
student from the school.
(7) The prescribed official may fine upto Twenty Five Thousand
Rupees to such school which collects fees against this Act.
12016E. Teachers' Union, teachers' conduct and other provisions: (1)
There shall be a Teachers' Union to promote the professional rights and
welfares of the teachers.
(2) The Teachers' Union may be formed in central and district
levels.
(3) The election of the Teachers' Union shall be as prescribed.
(4) 121.............
(5) The teacher shall be removed from his/her post in the
following conditions: -
122.................................,
If he/she fails to fulfill the duty of the post,
If he/she remains continuously absent in the school
for more than Fifteen days without any information,
If it is proved that he/she attends school when
drunk,
120 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
121 Deleted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
122 Deleted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
If he/she is convicted by a court of a criminal
offence involving moral turpitude.
12316F.Academic qualifications: The qualifications for a school teacher shall
be as prescribed.
12416G.May Rejoin by the order of the Court: (1) The teacher once
dismissed or discharged from the job followed by the departmental
action may rejoin the job only by an order or decision of the Court.
(2) The teacher rejoined pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall receive
full salary, allowance, increased salary (grade) if any, from the date of
dismissal and rejoining.
12516H. Transfer of Teacher: (1) The teacher who desires a transfer shall fill
up a prescribed form and file an application to the concerned District
Education Office.
(2) If, an application is received pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
126District Education Officer may transfer such teacher if the vacant
position and subject matches.
127Provided that, while so transferring the approval of the District
Education Officer of the place where the applicant is working shall be
taken.
(3) Not withstanding anything contained in Sub-section (2), if
such conditions prevail under which the transfer of any teacher becomes
unavoidable, the District Education Officer may transfer within the
123 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
124 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
125 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment
126 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
127 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
district, the Regional Education Director may transfer within the region
and the Department of Education may transfer within Nepal.
(4) While transferring the teacher pursuant to Sub-section (3),
the District Education Officer shall obtain prior approval from the
Regional Education Director; the Regional Education Director from the
Department of Education and the Department of Education from the
Ministry of Education and Sports, and the recommendation of the
concerned school.
12816I. Not to be applicable to the Institutional Schools: Except otherwise
provided in this Act, the provisions as referred to in Sections 11J, 15,
129Sub-section (5) of Section 16E, 16G, 16H and Sub-section (1) and
Clauses (a), (d) and (e) of Sub-section (2) of Section 17 shall not be
applicable to the Institutional Schools.
130Provided that,
The provisions relating to the shifting of a school
from one place to another pursuant to Section 15,
shall be applicable in the case of the institutional
school also.
The provisions relating to the change of the name
of an institutional school shall be as prescribed.
13116J Institutional school shall provide scholarship: (1) An institutional
school shall provide free scholarship student who are poor, disabled,
woman, dalits or indigenous tribes in such a way that such scholarship
128 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
129 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
130 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
131 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
shall not be less than Ten percent of the total number of the enrolled
students in such school.
(2) In order to select the students for the purpose of providing
scholarship pursuant to Sub-section (1), a scholarship selection
committee shall be formed in every school consisting of its head master,
the representative of the concerned District Education Office and the
representative of the guardian involved in the school management
committee.
(3) The student's selection criteria for the scholarship pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
13216K. Salary and allowance shall not be received and the tenure of
service shall not be counted: Except in the condition referred to in

Section 16g or in case of being absent from the duty upon sanctioning
leave as per the Rules, the teacher, who has been absent in the school
shall not obtain the salary and allowances for the absent period and
such absent period shall not be counted in his/her tenure of office.
13316L. Provision relating to employee: The employee in community school
shall be arranged as prescribed.
13417. Penalty: 135(1) If, anybody embezzles or causes damage/loss to the
property of the school, the 136Adjudicating Authority shall collect the
claimed amount and punish him/her with a fine of up to Twenty-Five
Thousand Rupees.
132 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
133 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
134 Amended by the First Amendment.
135 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
136 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
137(1a.) If, anyone acts or cause to act, or assist to act as
following such a person 138............... shall be liable for a fine up to One
Hundred Thousand Rupees or an imprisonment upto Six months' or
both based on the gravity of the crime.
If the secrecy of question papers is disclosed,
In case of negligence or irresponsible activity found
in checking answer sheets,
If enters or tries to enter into the Examination
Centre without the permission of the concerned
official, or commits any indecent act by taking the
Examination Centre under control,
If commits irregularity in publishing examination
results,
If appears in examinations on the behalf of others,
If commits any other act which destroy the
decorum of the examinations.
139(1b) If a lawsuit is filed against any teacher or the employee of
the school before the 140Adjudicating Authority or, the Court in an
offence as referred to in Sub-sections (1) and (1A), such teacher or
employee shall be suspended from the post from the date of filing a case
until the case is disposed of. A departmental action pursuant to this Act
shall be carried out if such teacher or employee found guilty by the
Court.
137 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
138 Deleted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
139 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
140 Inserted by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
(2) 141Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (1)
and (1a.), the prescribed official may punish a person who contravenes
the provision of this Act or the Rules made thereunder as following:
To carry out disciplinary actions against the
teachers and employees of the Schools,
To expel a student from School, hostel or
examination,
142 (c) To impose a fine of One Thousand Rupees to
Twenty Five Thousand Rupees based on the gravity
of offence,
To reduce, suspend or cancel the governmental
assistance to the school,
To cancel the permission or approval so provided
to the School.
14317A. Investigation and prosecution of a Case Relating to Property:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 144Government Cases
Act, 2049 (1993), a case relating to the offence punishable pursuant to
Sub-section (1) of Section 17 shall be investigated by the prescribed
official, and such case shall be filed to the Adjudicating Authority in the
name of the concerned School after the investigation.
(2) During the process of investigation and filing of the case
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the prescribed official may take legal
opinion of the Government Attorney.
141 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
142 Amended by the Sixth Amendment.
143 Inserted by the First Amendment.
144 Amended by Seventh Amendment.
14517B. Adjudicating Authority: The cases relating to the offence punishable
pursuant to Sub-section (1) of Section 17 shall be heard and disposed of
by the Chief District Officer.
14617C. Government of Nepal shall be plaintiff: (1) Government of Nepal
shall be the plaintiff in a case as referred to in Sub-sections (1) and (1a)
of Section 17.
(2) The case to be filed pursuant to Sub-sections (1a) shall be
deemed to have been included in the Schedule-1 of Government Cases
Act, 2049.
14718. Appeal: (1) An appeal, against the penalty imposed by the Chief
District Officer pursuant to Section 17B, may be filed before Court of
Appeal within Thirty Five days.
148(2) An appeal, against the penalty imposed by the prescribed
authority pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 17, may be filed before
the prescribed authority.
Power to frame Rules: (1) Government of Nepal may frame Rules in
order to execute the objectives of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of powers vested by Subsection (1), such Rules may in particular make provisions on the
following:
Flag, emblem and prayers of the Schools,
149(b)
Fee to be chargeable on students and its realization,
145 Inserted by the First Amendment.
146 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
147 Amended by the First Amendment.
148 Amended by the Education and Sports Related some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2063.
149 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
150(c)
Grants to be given to the Schools,
Examination of Schools,
151(d1) Relating to determination of equivalency of School
Leaving Certificate Examination,
152(d2) Relating to National Teachers Service Commission,
153(d3) Relating to Teachers Registration Office of the
Schools,
Determination of extra-curricular activities and
programmes of the School,
154 (f)
Relating to oath of the teachers and employees of
the school,
Methods of admission of students in Schools and
the number of students,
Protection of properties of Schools,
Operation of hostel of Schools,
Checking of income and expenditure of Schools,
Methods of preparing and keeping of records,
ledgers and other documents of Schools,
155(l) Curriculum, textbook and reference materials of
Schools,
150 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
151 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
152 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
153 Inserted by the Sixth Amendment.
154 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
Code of conduct of teachers and students,
Library and reading rooms of Schools,
Co-education,
156(p) Training on Teaching and School Management,
Powers and duties of a Headmaster,
157 (r)
Conditions of service of the teachers of Schools,
158(s)
Teaching 159License, identity card and pass (logo)
of the teachers of Schools,
160(t)
Special education,
161(u)
Informal Education,
162(u1) Distance Education
Constitution of Teacher's Service,
District Education Fund,
Student counseling and guidance service 163………
Other necessary matters,
164(z)
Operation of Residential Schools,
155 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
156 Amended by Seventh Amendment.
157 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
158 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
159 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
160 Amended by the Fourth Amendment.
161 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
162 Inserted by the Seventh Amendment.
163 The word "and" is deleted by the Second Amendment.
164 Inserted by the Second Amendment and Amendment by the Fifth Amendment.
165(z1) Relating to 166Institutional Schools,
167(z2) Relating to coaching class, language teaching class
and teachers training class operated in private
sector,
Powers to Remove Difficulties: If any difficulty or hindrance is
encountered in executing the purposes of this Act, Government of Nepal
may, in order to remove such difficulty or hindrance, issue an order by a
Notification in the Nepal Gazette, and such order shall be considered as
incorporated in this Act.
Savings and Exemption: (1) The provision of 168this Act or, the Rules
made thereunder shall prevail on matters provided herein and in all
other matters the prevailing laws of Nepal shall apply.
169(1a) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall
prevent Government of Nepal to take action pursuant to Prevention of
Corruption Act, 2059 (2002).
(2) Education Act, 2025 (1968) and Education Rules, 2027
(1972) shall not apply in the areas where this Act has come into force.
165 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
166 Amended by the Seventh Amendment.
167 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.
168 Amended by the Seventh Amendment
169 Inserted by the First Amendment.

===== SOURCE: Individual-Privacy-Act(2075).pdf =====

The Privacy Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075.6.2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 14 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Privacy
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions on promoting dignified living
standards by making provisions to ensure the right to privacy of the matters relating to
body, residence, property, document, data, correspondence and character of every
person, to manage the protection and safe use of personal information remained in any
public body or institution, and to prevent encroachment on the privacy of every person;
Now, therefore be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the “Privacy Act,
2075 (2018)."
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act,-
"Residence" means a house, rented room, apartment, room or place
of residence where any person resides, and this term also includes
a hotel, resort, lodge, guesthouse or camp room or any other place
of similar nature where he or she stays to spend a night.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed
in the Rules framed under this Act.
"Personal information" means the following information related to
any person:
His or her caste, ethnicity, birth, origin, religion, color or
marital status,
His or her education or academic qualification,
His or her address, telephone or address of electronic letter
(email),
His or her passport, citizenship certificate, national identity
card number, driving license, voter identity card or details
of identity card issued by a public body,
A letter sent or received by him or her to or from anybody
mentioning personal information,
His or her thumb impressions, fingerprints, retina of eye,
blood group or other biometric information,
His or her criminal background or description of the
sentence imposed on him or her for a criminal offence or
service of the sentence,
Matter as to what opinion or view has been expressed by a
person who gives professional or expert opinion, in the
process of any decision.
"Property" means a movable, immovable, physical or abstract,
tangible or intangible property, and this term also includes
intellectual property.
"Public body" means the following body:
The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local
Level or government office under the Government of
Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level,
A court, other judicial body, constitutional body or office
thereunder,
A regulatory body or office thereunder,
A company, bank, committee having full or partial
ownership or control of the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government or Local Level or commission,
corporation, authority, incorporation, academy, board,
center, council and other body corporate of similar nature
established by the Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government or Local Level pursuant to law.
A political party and organization registered under
prevailing law,
A university, college, school, research center and other
similar academic or educational institution that has been
established or operated by the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government or Local Level or that has obtained
full or partial grants from the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government or Local Level.
An institution operated with credit, grant or guarantee of
the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local
Level.
An institution having full or partial ownership or control of
the body mentioned in sub-clause (1), (2), (3) or (4).
Any other institution specified by the Government of Nepal
as a public entity by publishing a notice in the Nepal
Gazette
"Person holding public post" means a person holding any post of a
public body upon being elected, nominated or appointed to such
post.
"Body corporate" means an organization, company, bank,
committee, cooperative association, federation or other body
corporate of similar nature established under the prevailing law.

Chapter-2
Privacy of Body and Family of Person
Privacy of body and personal life of person: (1) The privacy of the matters
relating to physical and mental condition of every person shall be inviolable.
(2) The matters of privacy of the body of any person shall be inviolable
without the consent of the person concerned, except in cases of conducting his or
her health examination, health treatment or emergency relief work.
(3) Every person shall have the right to maintain the privacy of the
matters such as biological or biometric identity, gender identity, sexuality,
sexual relation, conception or abortion, virginity, potency, impotency or physical
illness related to his or her personal life.
(4) No person shall publish, or cause to be published, any matters referred
to in sub-section (3) which are related to any person so as to affect, inflict or
insult in the personal life of such a person, by writing, speaking, publishing or
using electronic means or any other manner.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, the privacy of
physical or mental condition or private life of a person may be disclosed on the
following condition:
If it is a matter involving the consent of the person concerned,
If it is the matter already made public by the person concerned
with his or her own will,
If it is the matter investigated in the course of any offence, by the
investigating or prosecuting official,
If the matter related to sub-section (3) or physical condition or
private life of a person has to be disclosed for obtaining any
facility or concession, and he or she obtains or desires to obtain
such facility or concession.
To have family privacy: (1) Every person shall have the right to maintain
family privacy for maintaining the family life or the family integrity.
(2) The matter related to mutual privacy that is known only between the
husband and wife in the course of conjugal life shall be inviolable except in the
cases where it is necessary in the context of the case running between the
husband and wife.
Not to search body: (1) Without obtaining the consent of any person, his or her
body or anything with him or her or used by him or her shall not be searched.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in cases where
it is necessary to carry out any security check under the prevailing law or to
search any person in the course of investigation of a criminal offence, the
authorized official or any person or security deputed for the purpose of security
in accordance with his or her order may carry out search in accordance with law.
(3) The officials deputed for conducting security check pursuant to subsection (2) shall have to retain with him or her the authority obtained for the
security check, and show it before conducting search if the person concerned
wants to see it.
(4) The security person deputed to follow the duty for regular or
emergency security check at any public place, wearing the badge and uniform
according to his or her post, shall be deemed to have had the authority for the
security check.
Privacy relating to reproductive health and pregnancy: The matter relating to
reproductive health and pregnancy of every woman shall be inviolable and,
without her consent, information of such matter shall not be given to anyone else
or be made public.
Provided that, it shall not bar to hold discussion between the concerned
specialists about such matter in the course of health treatment or providing
information for the member of his or her undivided family and for his or her
guardian, if he or she has not attained the age of eighteen years or is of unsound
mind.

Chapter-3
Privacy Relating to Residence
To have privacy of residence: (1) Every person shall have the right to privacy
of his or her residence.
(2) Except for searching under the law by the authorized official or in
accordance with his or her order, entering, or causing other to enter into, the
residence of any person, or searching or getting it searched shall be forbidden.
(3) While entering pursuant to sub-section (2), entering or causing other
to enter into, or searching or getting it searched, by breaching the privacy of the
personal life of the person concerned or member of his or her family, shall be
forbidden.
(4) When any person is arrested outside his or her residence by the
authorized official or pursuant to order of such official, searching or causing his
or her residence to be searched, simply because he is arrested, shall be forbidden.
(5) If there is a reasonable cause to search his or her residence as well
when any person is arrested pursuant to sub-section (4), his or her residence may
be searched for that purpose by obtaining a separate order of the authorized
official pursuant to law.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, for the
purpose of carrying out disaster management or emergency rescue, any person's
residence may be entered into.
(7) Other provisions relating to maintaining privacy of the residence and
search or investigation shall be in accordance with the prevailing law.
To provide notice while entering into residence: (1) If anybody's residence is
to be searched pursuant to Section 7 in the course of any criminal offence, he or
she shall have to be provided with a written notice setting out the purpose for so
entering into the residence thereof.
(2) The conditions and procedures under the prevailing law shall have to
be fulfilled while entering into the residence of any person pursuant to subsection (1).
Provided that if the accused person is likely to flee or escape or evidence
is likely to be destroyed if search is not conducted immediately, it may be
entered into by maintaining the record of such matter.
Not to install CCTV camera in the residence: No person shall install, or cause
to be installed, CCTV camera at the residence of any person without his or her
consent, or for collecting personal information related to the user of such
residence.

Chapter-4
Privacy Relating to Property
To have privacy of property: (1) Every person shall have the right to keep his
or her property and details relating to such property confidential.
(2) No person shall enter, in an unauthorized manner, into other's house,
land, vehicle or other property without permission or consent of the owner of
such property.
(3) The public body or body corporate or any employee working in such a
body that keeps the details relating to the property of a person or that can have
information thereof shall not inform anyone else, or publish or cause the details
of property of any person published in any way, without the consent of the
concerned person.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or (3), when
the details of property is demanded in accordance with the order of authorized
official in the course of investigation of any offence, or when demand is made by
the court in the context of the case filed against any person on the same issue,
the concerned agency, body corporate or official that maintains the records of the
details of property shall provide such record.

Chapter-5
Privacy Relating to Document
To have privacy of document: (1) Every person shall have the right to privacy
of the personal document related to him or her.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the following documents shall be
deemed to be the personal documents of the concerned person:
Certificate relating to educational qualification,
Medical history, certificate or health examination report,
Citizenship certificate, passport, voter identity card, driving
license or other documents of such nature revealing identity,
Bank account in a bank or the details of amount in such account,
Cheque, draft, debit card, credit card or bank statement or other
negotiable instrument related to banking and financial transaction,
Biological or biometric data and thumb impression,
Land ownership certificate related to immovable property or other
document relating to ownership of land,
Vehicle ownership card (Blue Book) or document relating to the
ownership of other property,
Securities or details related thereto,
Identity card of the Employee Provident Fund, pension card or
other document of similar nature,
Other documents as prescribed.
No person shall publish, or cause to be published, personal
document of anyone held in a public body pursuant to sub-section (2).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or (3), personal
document or any of its details may be published, or caused to be published, or
any details thereof may be made subject of study, research or examination on the
following conditions:
If there is consent of the concerned person,
If the identity card revealing the identity of any person is required
for the purpose of using public service,
If order is issued under the law by the court or authorized official
in the course of any case,
If any order is so issued by the authorized official in the course of
investigation and prosecution of a criminal offence.

Chapter-6
Privacy Relating to Data
To have privacy of data: (1) Every person shall have the right to keep the
personal data or details related to him or her confidential.
While collecting personal or family data of any person, his or her
consent shall be obtained.
The data collected by a public body or body corporate upon
obtaining the consent of the concerned person shall be used only for the purpose
for which such data have been collected.
Provided that if any data are demanded for the national security or peace
and order, it shall not be deemed to bar to provide such data in accordance with
the prevailing law.
No person shall, without obtaining the consent of another person,
provide the following data related to that person to anyone else or publish, or
cause to be published, such data:
Details relating to health examination,
Details relating to property and income generation,
Details relating to employment,
Details relating to family matters,
Biometric details and thumb impression,
Signature or electronic signature,
Details relating to political affiliation and election,
Details relating to business or transaction.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), in cases
where it is necessary to provide any personal data or details to the court or the
agency or official authorized under law in the course of investigation of any
criminal offence, such data or details shall be provided.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if there
arises a question as to the issues such as age, qualification, character, sexuality,
disability of any person, and the authorized official so demands, the concerned
person shall provide such details or documents.

Chapter-7
Privacy Relating to Correspondence
To have privacy of correspondence: (1) Every person shall have the right to
maintain privacy of his or her letters, correspondence or electronic letters
(emails) or the dialogue transmitted through electronic means or other
correspondence of similar nature.
No person shall, in an unauthorized manner, read, see, provide to
anyone else, publish, broadcast, or otherwise make public the letters,
correspondence or electronic letters (emails) or dialogue transmitted by
electronic means or other correspondence of similar nature referred to in subsection (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the letters,
correspondence or electronic letters (emails) or dialogue to be transmitted
through electronic means or other correspondence of similar nature may be
provided, or cause to be provided with the consent of the concerned person or by
the order of the authorized official in the course of the investigation of any
criminal offence.
Not to open letters: (1) Except with the consent of the person concerned, or the
order issued under the prevailing law by any competent authority in the course of
the investigation of any criminal offence, no one shall open, or cause to be
opened, personal letters of such person.
No person shall open, see or forward the electronic letters (emails)
of other person.

Chapter-8
Privacy Relating to Character
To have privacy of character: (1) Every person shall have the right to maintain
privacy of his or her character, personal conduct and behavior.
Except in the case of taking action under law by inquiring into any
question that is raised regarding the character, conduct or behavior of any
person, no person shall make any comments on the character of that person.
No person shall do any kind of act or action so as to affect the
character of any person, defame or insult him or her, harm his or her self-esteem
or affect in his or her family life, or publish, or cause to be published, any matter
relating to his or her conduct or behavior.
Not to take or sell photograph: (1) No person shall take photograph of any
person without his or her consent so as to damage his or her character or social
prestige, or make another picture by putting picture of other person together with
his or her picture by any way with the intention to defame him or her or to make
another picture by mixing some part of the picture of one person with another
part of the picture of another person, or publish or cause to be published or made
public the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the
picture of another person in the same place also happens to be taken by anybody
while taking the picture of any public place or any person, it shall not be deemed
to be the offence.
Provided that the picture happened to be so taken also shall not be used is
contrary to sub-section (1).
No person shall publish, disseminate, buy, sell or publish the
picture of any person that has been taken without obtaining his or her consent
with the intention to annoy, distress or take any improper advantage or get profit
by making commercial use of the picture, or cause such act to be done.
Not to make the person under investigation public: Until the charge sheet has
been filed in the concerned body regarding the offence of which any person
under investigation in accordance with the law has been accused, the authorized
official shall not make him or her public in any manner.
Provided that it shall not bar to publish the name of such accused person
and detail or information of the charge against him or her.
Not to disclose confidential matter: If any person has obtained any matter
relating to the conduct of anyone from any other person in the course of his or
her professional duty, that person shall not disclose such matter to anyone except
where the concerned person has so consented or order has been made by the
authorized official to that effect.

Chapter-9
Electronic Means and Privacy
To have privacy of electronic means: (1) Every person shall have the right to
maintain privacy of the matter relating to any of his or her personal information,
document, correspondence, data or character that remained in electronic means.
No one shall obtain the notice, information, correspondence of any
person remained in electronic means in unauthorized manner, violate or provide
its privacy for anybody in unauthorized manner.
Except for the consent given by the concerned person or order
issued, under law, by authorized official, no one shall listen to any dialogue or
talks held between two or more than two persons through electronic means, or
mark or record the sound of such talks by making use of any mechanical device.
Provided that in the case of a speech or statement made publicly, the
provision of this sub-section shall not be applicable.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) or (3), any
notice, information or correspondence may be listened to, marked or recorded, or
cause to be listened to, marked or recorded with the consent of the concerned
person or order of the authorized official.
Other provisions relating to the privacy of electronic notice and
data shall be as prescribed.
Relating to installing CCTV camera at public place: (1) If it is necessary to
install CCTV camera at any public place, such camera may be installed, or
caused to be installed, at a place other than the toilet, bathroom or changing
room.
(2) Provision shall be made to give a notice of such camera installed at
the place where the camera has been installed pursuant to sub-section (1) so that
all can see and be informed.
(3) The provisions relating to the installation of the CCTV camera at any
place shall be as prescribed.
Not to make surveillance or espionage: In order to make surveillance or
espionage of the residence of any person or any office, or for the purpose of
obtaining anything confidential pursuant to this Act, no electronic means,
photography or method may be used.
Not to use drone: No drone of any kind or similar kind of other device shall be
used or no act shall be done with the purpose of obtaining any secret information
of any public body, archaeologically important place, building of security
agency, protected zone or zone of mine or mineral or at the residence of any
person, without permission of the authorized official or such a person, except in
border area or public place of the country.

Chapter-10
Collection and Protection of Personal Information
Not to collect personal information except in accordance with law: (1) No
one except the official authorized under law or the person permitted by such
official shall collect, store, protect, analyze, process or publish the personal
information of any person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), information
provided by the concerned person may be collected after obtaining his or her
consent for the purpose of conducting any study, research or collection of public
opinion.
(3) While collecting information pursuant to sub-section (2), it shall not
be collected without fully informing him or her regarding the purpose for which
the information is collected.
Explanation: When the notice about collecting data is broadcast or
published through the media of mass communication by addressing the general
public, such notice shall be deemed to have provided information for the
purposes of this Section.
(4) While collecting information pursuant to sub-section (2), the
following matters shall be clearly set out:
Time of collecting information,
Content of information,
Nature of information,
Objective of collecting information,
Method and process of testing information,
Certainty of the matter of maintaining privacy of the collected
information,
Matters including the protection of the collected information.
(5) While collecting information of any person, the official authorized for
collecting information pursuant to law shall have to collect it by obtaining
information from the concerned person.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), the following
person may provide the information on behalf of the following person:
In the case of the person who has not attained to the age of
eighteen years or who is of unsound mind, his or her guardian or
curator, provided there will be no harm to him or her when such
information is so provided.
In the case of the other person, the attorney or representative
authorized by him or her.
(7) Except in the following circumstance, the official authorized pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall not collect personal information:
If the personal information has been collected by such official
using authority under the same law under which it is collected,
If there is provision for collecting such information by such
official under the prevailing law,
If it is collected in the course of investigation, prosecution of
criminal offence or action under the court proceeding or
enforcement of law,
If the person regarding whom any body corporate or public body
collects information, holds or is about to hold any post of such a
body, or if such information remain under the approved programs
of such a body corporate or body.
(8) Other provisions relating to the collection, processing, analysis and
use of personal information shall be as prescribed.
Not to deem to be personal information: Except as otherwise provided in the
prevailing law, the following information regarding the person holding a public
post shall not be deemed to be his or her personal information:
The matter as to of which public body he or she is an incumbent
official,
His or her post and office address, telephone number or address of
electronic letter (email) through which contact may be established,
Name of the person signing any letter or document issued or
written by a public body, and his or her post,
Description of job to be performed by him or her and its nature,
Matters relating to the conditions of his or her service.
Protection of collected information: (1) The personal information that has been
collected by any public body or remained under the responsibility or control of
such a body shall be protected by such body.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the public body shall have to make
appropriate arrangement against unauthorized access likely to occur to personal
information, or against the possible risk of unauthorized use, change, disclosure,
publication or transmission of such information.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
public body may disclose or get any personal information disclosed under the
prevailing law.
Not to use personal information without consent: (1) Except in the following
circumstances, the personal information collected by or remained under the
responsibility or control of a public body or body corporate shall not be used or
given to any one without the consent of the concerned person:
It has been published or distributed for the purpose of which the
personal information has been collected,
If demanded in written form, in the course of investigation or
prosecution of a criminal case, by the official authorized for
making such investigation or prosecution,
If an order is made by the court in the course of taking action on a
sub-judice case,
If question is to be solved, when it is raised about the qualification
or any other matter of the person, who is holding a public post
under the prevailing law,
If the authorized official demands for any particular kind of
information in written form, in order to solve the question raised
on any particular matter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the authorized
official of the body having the responsibility for collection and protection of
information may, in the following circumstances, publish, or cause to be
published, any personal information for the purpose of a study or investigation
for the public purpose:
If the matter about which investigation has been made cannot be
fulfilled without personal identity,
If damage and loss is not caused to the concerned person while
giving personal information of any matter that has been given for
the purpose of investigation,
If the concerned person has consented at the time of obtaining
information or any time thereafter for the public purpose.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, for the purpose of
archives officially established by the Government of Nepal or Provincial
Government, personal information may be provided, in the following
circumstances:
If there is any information that does not affect negatively to the
personal status, professional or personal privacy of the concerned
person,
If such information is provided for the historical research or
collection or accumulation of historical facts or information,
If it is personal information of any person thirty years or more than
thirty years has passed after the death of such person.
Provided that such information shall not be provided if he
or she gets insulted or it causes damage and loss or insultation in
any manner to his or her heir or children, as a result of the
publicity of personal information of such person.
If such information has been recorded since one hundred years or
more than that period.
Not to process sensitive information: (1) A public body shall not process, or
cause to be processed, any sensitive personal information remained under its
responsibility or control.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the following information shall be
deemed to be sensitive information of the concerned person:
His or her caste, ethnicity or origin,
Political affiliation,
Religious faith or belief,
Physical or mental health or condition,
Sexual orientation or event relating to sexual life,
Details relating to property.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), such
information may be processed in the following circumstances:
In the course of alleviation of disease, public health protection,
disease identification, health treatment, management of health
institution and providing health service by the licensed doctor in
the concerned subject or by the health worker under direction of
the licensed doctor, without insulting or letting the concerned
person feel inferior.
If the concerned person has published the information himself or
herself.
Application may be made to correct information: (1) If any person thinks that
any information related to him or her which is remained under the responsibility,
protection or control of any public body is wrong or is not based on the fact, he
or she may, at any time, make an application to the concerned public body in the
prescribed form to correct such information.
Provided that if he or she has already taken any advantage or facility on
the basis of such information, application may not be made to correct such
information.
(2) While making an application pursuant to sub-section (1), he or she
shall have to submit the details of why such information has been wrong or has
not been based on the fact, and also the evidence to justify the fact or details
claimed by him or her.
(3) If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the public
body thinks that it is necessary to correct such information as prescribed by
making inquiry, it may correct such information by making necessary
improvement.

Chapter-11
Offences and Punishment
Offence and punishment: (1) If a person does, or causes to be done, any of the
following acts, he or she shall be deemed to have committed the offence under
this Act:
Any act contrary to sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) of Section 3,
Any act contrary to sub-section (2) of Section 4,
Any act contrary to sub-section (1) of Section 5,
Any act contrary to Section 6,
Act contrary to Sub-section (2), (3) and (4) of Section 7,
Any act contrary to Section 9,
Any act contrary to sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 10,
Any act contrary to sub-section (3) of Section 11,
Any act contrary to sub-section (4) of Section 12,
Any act contrary to sub-section (2) of Section 13,
Any act contrary to Section 14,
Any act contrary to sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 15,
Any act contrary to Section 16,
Any act contrary to Section 18,
Any act contrary to sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 19,
Any act contrary to Section 21,
Any act contrary to Section 22,
Any act contrary to sub-sections (1), (3) and (7) of Section 23,
Any act contrary to sub-section (1) of Section 26,
Any act contrary to sub-section (1) of Section 27,
Punishment of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years
or fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both shall be imposed for the
offence referred to in sub-section (1),
(3) The Government of Nepal shall become the plaintiff in the cases on
the offences as referred to in clause (c), (m), (p), (q), (r), (s) or (t), and such
offences shall be deemed to have been included in Schedule-1 of the National
Criminal Procedure Code, 2074.
Complaint may be made: (1) When any offence under this Act, other than that
mentioned in sub-section (3) of Section 29, is committed, the concerned person
may make a complaint to the concerned District Court.
(2) While making a complaint pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall have to
be made within three months from the date of commission of such act.
Compensation: (1) If any kind of damage, loss or injury is caused to any person
due to the commission of any act deemed to be the offence or any other act under
this Act, the concerned person or victim may make a complaint to the concerned
District Court to get compensation paid for such damage, loss or pain, as well.
(2) If a complaint referred to in sub-section (1) is made, the concerned
District Court shall cause to be paid the reasonable compensation to the victim
from the offender if it thinks that compensation has to be paid.
To award departmental punishment: If the person holding a public post does
not perform the act to be performed under this Act, or performs any act which is
forbidden to be performed, the departmental or other punishment shall be
awarded to him or her in accordance with the prevailing law relating to the
conditions of his or her service, in addition to the punishment imposable
pursuant to this Act.

Chapter-12
Miscellaneous
To obtain consent of guardian or curator: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, if the matters mentioned in this Act that they may be
published or privacy may be disclosed with the consent of the concerned person
are related to the person who has not attained the age of eighteen years or who is
of unsound mind or who has intellectual disability, such matters may be
published or privacy thereof be disclosed only when his or her guardian or
curator gives consent and if it benefits him or her while publishing such matters
or disclosing privacy related to them.
Not to deem to be a bar: (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to
bar the doing of the following in relation to the person mentioned in sub-section
To obtain any notice or information in the course of court
proceedings,
To obtain any personal information or details from any person,
regarding investigation or prosecution of any offence under the
To publish his or her details relating to property under the
prevailing law,
To publish by the body concerned, his or her details disclosing the
identity including educational qualification, citizenship, passport,
driving license,
Except for the matters prohibited by the prevailing law relating to
the press and newspapers and national broadcasting, to publish or
broadcast or make public any notice, information, data, news,
picture obtained or collected in course of maintaining public
welfare and transparency or conducting investigative journalism,
in any manner, without making it contrary to the basic norms of
privacy of the person,
To publish or transmit opinion, thoughts publicly expressed by him
or her or audio-visual and picture captured in a publicly organized
program,
To make fair comments, along with the basis, reason or evidence,
about the details related to his or her property or the details
referred to in clause (d) or the opinion, views expressed publicly
by him or her or details related to his or her public function.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the term "person" means the
following persons:
A person holding a public post,
A person involved in the formal process of being appointed,
nominated or elected to a public post, or recommended for such a
post,
A person retired from the service or relieved of a public post,
A person known publicly or who may be one of the public interest
or concern,
A person who so appears that it is required to transmit a notice or
information to the general public, owing to public welfare,
decency or morality or regarding the act that has been done or
about to be done against the law.
Not to act contrary to this Act: The body which transmits any public
information shall transmit such information in a manner not to be contrary to this
Power to frame Rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules in
order to implement this Act.

===== SOURCE: Land-Revenue-Act(2034).pdf =====

Land Revenue Act, 2034 (1978)
Date of Authentication and Publication
2034.9.18 (2 Jan. 1978)
Amendments:
1. Land Revenue (First Amendment) Act, 2040
(1983)
2040.7.13 (30 Oct. 1983)
2. Administration of Justice (Fourth
Amendment) Act, 2043 (1986)
2043.7.24 (10 Nov. 1986)
3. Land Revenue (Second Amendment) Act,
2045 (1988)
2045.6.26 (12 Oct. 1988)
4. Land Revenue (Third Amendment) Act,
2046 (1989)
2046.7.11 (27 Oct. 1989)
5. Finance
Related
Nepal
(Amendment) Act, 2047 (1990)
2047.8.27 (13 Dec. 1990)
6. Administration of Justice Act, 2048 (1991)
2048.2.16 (30 May, 1991)
7. Land Revenue (Fourth Amendment) Act,
2049 (1992)
2049.9.8 (23 Dec. 1992)
8. Land Revenue (Fifth Amendment) Act,
2054 (1997)
2054.8.26 (11 Dec. 1997)
9. Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal
Laws Amending Act, 2066 (2010)1
2066.10.7 (21 Jan. 2010)
This Act came into force on 15 Jestha 2065(28 June 2008) and "Prasasti" and the word "Kingdom"
has been deleted.
Act Number 25 of the Year 2034 (1978)
An Act Made to Provide for Land Revenue
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the provisions
relating to collection and recovery of the land revenue and to make some
additional provisions on cultivation of land;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram
Shah Dev on the advice and with the consent of Rastriya Panchayat.

Chapter -1
Preliminary
Short Title, Extent and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called
as the "Land Revenue Act, 2034 (1978)."
(2) It shall extend throughout Nepal.
(3) It shall commence in such District and on such date as may be
specified by Government of Nepal, by a Notification published in the Nepal
Gazette. 2
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this
Act,-
"Land Revenue Office" means the office established pursuant to

Section 3.
"Land Revenue" means the land revenue and any other revenue
similar thereto required to be paid by a land owner to Government of
Nepal pursuant to the prevailing Nepal Law, and it also includes any
Notice regarding the date of commencement mentioned at the last page.
fee (penalty) payable for non-payment of the land revenue within the
time-limit referred to in this Act.
(b1) 3 "Land Revenue Officer" means the Chief Land Revenue Officer,
4........., Land Revenue Officer or in-charge of the Land Revenue
Office as may be appointed by Government of Nepal to exercise the
powers of the Land Revenue Officer pursuant to this Act.
(b2)5 "Government land" means a land in which road, street, railway and
governmental building, house or office is situated, and this term
includes forest, jungle, river, stream, canal, lake, pond and bank
thereof, canal, ditch, barren, uncultivated or other land, steep, sandy
land under control of the Government of Nepal and also a land as
specified as a government land by the Government of Nepal upon
publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette from time to time.
(b3) 6 "Public land" means a road, well, water bank, pond and bank
thereof, cattle exit, pasture land, graveyard, grave, inn, rest house,
shrine, religious pray land, monument, temple, junction, sewerage,
open public place, exhibition and fair place, public entertainment
and sports place that has remained in use since ancient time and
belong to the public not to any individual, and also a land as
specified as a public land by the Government of Nepal upon
publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette from time to time.
"Year" means a fiscal year.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the Rules framed under this Act.
Inserted by Fourth Amendment.
Deleted by Fifth Amendment.
Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.
Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.

Chapter - 2
Establishment of Land Revenue Office
Establishment of Land Revenue Office: (1) Government of Nepal
shall, 7as per necessity establish the Land Revenue Officer in each District.
8(1a) The Land Revenue Officer may delegate any or all of his/her
powers to any officer level employee subordinate to him/her subject to the
exercising of such power under his/her general supervision and control.
(2) The Revenue Office and Funds and Collection Offices
maintained at the time of commencement of this Act shall ipso facto be
converted into the Land Revenue Office after the commencement of this
(3) After the commencement of this Act, the Land Revenue Offices
shall carry on the functions started by the Revenue Office or Fund and
Collection Office, immediately at the time of commencement of this Act
which are yet to be completed.
Devolution of Functions of Land Administration on Land Reform
Officer and Land Revenue Office: (1) The Land Administration Office
and Land Administrators maintained at the time of commencement of this
Act shall ipso facto be converted into Land Reform Office and Land
Reform Officers respectively after the commencement of this Act; and the
functions under the Act relating to Land, 2021 (1963) shall be carried out
by the Land Reform Office or Land Reform Officer under that Act, after
the commencement of this Act.
Amended by Fourth Amendment.
Inserted by Fourth Amendment.
(2) After the commencement of this Act, the functions under the
Lands Act, 2021 (1963) started by the Land Administration Office or Land
Administrator under the Land Administration Act, 2024 (1966) at the time
of commencement of this Act which are but yet to be completed shall be
carried on by the Land Reform Office or Land Reform Officer pursuant to
the Lands Act, 2021 (1963), after the commencement of this Act.
(3) The functions other than those referred to in Sub-section (2)
having been started by the Land Administration Office or Land
Administrator pursuant to the Land Administration Act, 2024 (1966) at the
time of commencement of this Act which are but yet to be completed shall
be carried out by the Land Revenue Office pursuant to this Act, after the
commencement of this Act.
Land Revenue Office to carry out functions to be carried out by
Revenue
Office,
Collection
Office
Administration Office Pursuant to Other Nepal Law: The function
to be carried out by the Revenue Office, Fund and Collection office or
Land Administration Office pursuant to other Nepal Law prevailing
immediately at the time of commencement of this Act shall be carried out
by the Land Revenue Office subject to Section 4 after the commencement
of this Act; and the functions to be carried out by the In-charge of the
Revenue Office, Fund and Collection Office or Land Administrator shall
be carried out by the In-charge of the Land Revenue Office and references
to such office or authority made in those laws shall be deemed to refer to
the Land Revenue Office or In-charge of the Land Revenue Office.

Chapter3
Register and Registration of Land
Registration of Land: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall register each
land within the District in such a manner as may be prescribed.
(2) In maintaining a registration book for the purpose of Sub-section
(1), it shall be maintained according to the landowner registration record
prepared in the land survey and measurement in a place where such survey
and measurement has been done and according to the records maintained in
the Land Revenue Office or the records received from the Land Reform
Office or other offices in a place where the land survey and measurement
has not been done.
Provided that, in respect of the land to which any other person is
entitled because of death of the registration holder or transferrable of title
by such holder, the Land Registration Office shall as per necessity dispatch
a mission to register the land in the name of such person entitled to the land
and maintain up-to-date records (inventory).
9(3) In maintaining the land registration book pursuant to Subsection (2), each Land Revenue Office may require the concerned land
holders to furnish such details as prescribed and it shall be the duty of each
land-holder to provide the details so required.
Special Provision Relating to Registration of Land: (1) In
maintaining the registration book pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 6,
in cases where the survey measurement of any land has been omitted in
doing survey under the Land (Survey and Measurement) Act, 2019 (1962),
the Land Revenue Office may, with the consent of the Survey Department
Inserted by Fourth Amendment.
and on the 10recommendation of the prescribed committee get the survey
measurement of that land done and register it accordingly.
11(1a) Notwithstanding anything contained in other Sections of this
Act, if Government of Nepal deems it necessary, it may, by notification
published in the Nepal Gazette for a commission or committee comprising
one chairperson and a maximum of four members in order to resolve any
problem arisen in respect of registration of the land belonging to any
person, class or area and make decision on the registration of land; and the
functions, duties and powers of the commission or committee shall be as
specified in the mode of formation of 12such commission or committee.
13(2) In cases where any land surveyed and measured pursuant to the
Land (Survey and Measurement) Act, 2019 (1962) has been omitted only to
be registered, the Land Revenue Office may, on the recommendation of the
prescribed committee, also register such land by making necessary inquiry
into the previously existing registration, land revenue as well as possession
of that land.
14(2a) …………..
(3) In the event of differences in the name, surname, address, age of
landholder 15or name, surname of his or her father, grand-father, husband or
father-in-law, plot number, area or type of the land or dual registration, the
Land Revenue Office may hold necessary inquiry and maintain the
registration by correcting such matter.
Amended by Fourth Amendment.
Inserted by Fourth Amendment.
12 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
Amended by Fifth Amendment.
Deleted by Fourth Amendment.
15 Inserted by Fifth Amendment.
7A.16 Same Landowner Indication Number can be given: The Land
Revenue Department may make necessary provision in a manner that the
same landowner indication number may be given to all lands in his or her
name within the State of Nepal.
Registration, Transmission, Dakhil Kharej and stricking out the
Record: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall carry out the functions of
registration, transmitting and crossing off the records of a deed pursuant to
the prevailing laws.
(2) For the purposes of setting out the amount in a deed to be
registered, the prescribed committee shall determine the minimum
value of the land within the concerned area.
(3) In registering or transmitting the land based on the deed of
compromise executed pursuant to the laws in force, the Land Revenue
Office shall register or transmit such a land only when the previous
registration, record or Numbari of the concerned land is verified.
(4) If an application is made by the concerned person for the
registration of the land owned by a person for the public purposes, the
Land Revenue Office may cross off the name of that person in relation
to that land, on the recommendation of the prescribed committee.
(5) In the event of alteration in the records of the land subject to
tenancy or to action of ceiling, the Land Revenue Office has to give a
notice thereof to the Land Reform Office.
16 Inserted by the Fifth Amendment.
17 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
8A.18 To up-date Survey and Map: (1) If the survey and map has to be
amended in accordance with the registration set pursuant to Sections 7 and
8, the Land Revenue Office has to write to the concerned 19Maintenance
Survey Section; and after it has been so written, the 20Maintenance Survey
Section has to make necessary amendment to the survey and map.
8B.21 To Withhold or Release House and Land: (1) If any house or land has
to be withheld owing to dispute thereof or for any other reason, the Land
Revenue Office may withhold such a house or land.
(2) If any office, court or government office writes to withhold
any house or land or to release the withholding of any house or land
pursuant to the laws in force, the Land Revenue Office shall withhold or
release such a house or land as so written.
(3) If any bank, financial institution established pursuant to the
law in force or local body writes to withhold any house or land or to
release the withholding of any house or land in the course of its
financial transactions, the Land Revenue Office shall withhold or release
such a house or land as prescribed. In so withholding or releasing the
withholding, the Land Revenue Office shall collect the fees as prescribed,
in the case of a bank or financial institution.

Chapter -4
Provisions relating to Recovery of Land Revenue
Power to Recover Land Revenue: (1) It hall be the function, duty and
power of the Land Revenue Office to recover the land revenue.
18 Inserted by Third Amendment.
19 Amended by Fourth Amendment.
20 Amended by Fourth Amendment.
21 Inserted by Second Amendment.
(2)22 Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), the
Government of Nepal may, by publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette, so
delegate powers to any government office or local body to collect land
revenue used to be collected by the Land Revenue Office.
(3)23 The local body has to credit to its fund the amount of land
revenue collected by it pursuant to Sub-section (1).
To Pay Land Revenue: The land holder of each land in respect of which
the land revenue has to be paid to Government of Nepal has to pay such
land revenue of that land each year as may be determined pursuant to the
prevailing Nepal Law.
10A.24To Determine the Rate of Land Revenue: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 10, the Government of Nepal may itself determine the
rate of land revenue to be paid by the landowner each year pursuant to this
Act or so specify that the local body may determine the rate of land
revenue.
Time Limit for Payment of Land Revenue: Each land holder has to
pay the land revenue required to be paid by him no later than the 25last day
of Jestha (about mid June) 13 each year.
Exemption from Land Revenue: Any land holder who pays the land
revenue no later than the last day of Magha (about mid February) for a year
shall be exempted from five percent land revenue payable for that year.
13.26 Fee to be levied in Event of Non-payment of land Revenue : In the
event of payment of the land revenue no later than the Fifteenth day of
Ashad (about mid July) of the year after the expiry of the time limit as
22 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
23 Inserted by First Amendment.
24 Inserted by Fifth Amendment.
25 Amended by First Amendment.
26 Amended by First Amendment.
referred to in Section 11, the land revenue along with Five percent fee shall
be recovered.
Inventory of Land in Respect Whereof Land Revenue is Due: The
Land Revenue Office shall, no later than the 27last day of Ashad (about mid
July) prepare such inventory of the land in respect whereof the land revenue
has not been paid and remained due even within the time limit 28referred to
in Section 13 as may be prescribed; and 29if any government office or local
body has collected land revenue, the government office or local body shall
prepare such an inventory and forward it to the Land Revenue Office within
that period. In cases where the land in respect whereof the land revenue as
mentioned in that inventory has remained due 30has to be auctioned off, the
Land Revenue Office shall, no later than the 31last day of Ashwin (about
mid October), publish a notice in the specified places.
Power to Withhold Land in Respect Whereof Land Revenue is
Due: The land of a land holder in respect whereof the land revenue
specified in the inventory as referred to in Section 14 is due may be
withheld by the Land Revenue Office unless and until the remaining land
revenue is paid up or the land is auctioned off to recover the arrears.
Provided that, the land holder may cultivate the land so withheld as
usual.
To Auction Off Land: (1) The Land Revenue Office 32may Auction off
as prescribed, the plot of land out of the land in respect whereof the land
revenue specified in the inventory as referred to in Section 14, in order to
recover the land revenue.
27 Amended by First Amendment.
28 Amended by First Amendment.
29 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
30 Amended by First Amendment.
31 Amended by Third Amendment.
32 Amended by First Amendment.
(2)33 In cases where any land has to be auctioned it off pursuant to
this Section, the act of such auction shall be started 34from the month of
Mangsir (about mid November).
(3) If no one agrees to buy the land while auctioning it off pursuant
to Sub-section (1), the ownership of such land shall devolve on
Government of Nepal; and the land of which ownership has devolved on
Government of Nepal may be sold and disposed off as prescribed.
Provided that, in spite of devolution of ownership of such land on
Government of Nepal, the tenancy right of the tenant over that land shall
remain existing.
(4) Any amount remaining surplus by deducting the arrears of land
revenue and a fee of Fifty percent thereof from the proceeds of the auction
made under Sub-section (1) shall be refunded to the concerned land holder.
(5) The monitoring of and other provisions vis-a-vis the land of
which ownership has been devolved on Government of Nepal pursuant to
Sub-section (3) shall be as prescribed pending the sale and disposal of that
land.
(6)35 Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, in cases
where the land revenue is paid from the Sixteenth day of Ashad (about last
day of June) to the completion of auction sale of the land, the Land
Revenue Office shall recover the land revenue as well as the fee to be set by
36Ten per cent per annum from such land holder.
33 Amended by First Amendment.
34 Amended by Third Amendment.
35 Amended by First Amendment.
36 Amended by Third Amendment.
Provided that, the land revenue shall be recovered by charging
Thirty Five percent fee on the arrears of the land revenue prior to the
commencement of this Sub-section.
Power to Extend Time-limit for Payment of Land Revenue: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 11, if Government of Nepal
thinks that there exists a situation in which the land revenue of any District
or 37any part of a District or of any person cannot be paid in any year within
the time-limit as specified in that Section, it may, by notification published
in the Nepal Gazette, extend the time limit for payment of the land revenue.
(2) In cases where the time-limit has been extended pursuant to Subsection (1), actions referred to in Section 13, 14, 15 and 16 shall be taken
only after expiration of the extended time-limit in 38any part of the District
where the time-limit has been extended and in such cases, the time-limit
shall be set by adding according to time-limit of the number of days so
extended to the time-limits as referred to in these Sections for taking out
various acts and actions.
Provision of Receipt: The Land Revenue Office or 39the government
office or local body recovering the land revenue has to provide a receipt of
the recovered land revenue to the payer of the land revenue.
Provision Relating to Recovery of Land Revenue of Land Beyond
Ceiling: Pending the transferable, by sale or disposal, of the land beyond
ceiling allowable under the Lands Act, 2021 (1962) after its being acquired
by the concerned authority, the land revenue of the land subject to
ownership and possession of the existing land holder shall be recovered
37 Amended by Finance Related Some Nepal Acts (Amendment) Act, 2047
38 Amended by Finance Related Some Nepal Acts (Amendment) Act, 2047
39 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
from that land holder in a manner that land revenue has to be paid to
Government of Nepal as usual.
Provided that, the land shall not be auctioned for arrears of land
revenue in respect of such land but the arrears of land revenue shall be
deducted from compensation to which the land holder is entitled.

Chapter - 5
Provisions Relating to Remission of Land Revenue
Remission of Land Revenue in Cases of River Cutting or Landslide: (1) If any land subject to land revenue is corded by the river or
stream, or becomes silted or affected by landslide or is covered with
landslide and becomes incapable of yielding major crops, the concerned
landholder has to make an application setting out details threof to the Land
Revenue Office in such format and within such time-limit as may be
prescribed.
Provided that, in the case of the land having standing crops, the
crops should not be harvested prior to holding inquiry pursuant to Subsection (2).
(2) The Chief of Land Revenue Office has to hold inquiry into the
matters set down in an application made pursuant to Sub-section (1) by
visiting the spot in person or dispatching a mission within Thirty days. If, in
holding such inquiry, it appears to grant remission of the land revenue for
that year, the Land Revenue Office has to ascertain by how much
percentage of the land revenue has to be remitted, remit the same and give
information thereof to the Land Revenue Department within Seven days.
(3) If it appears from the inquiry as referred to in Sub-section (2) that
any land has become useless forever, the Land Revenue Office shall make a
submission to Government of Nepal to cross off the inventory of that land,
and Government of Nepal shall, if it deems reasonable, order the Land
Revenue Office to cross off the inventory of that land.
Remission of Land Revenue in case of Non-yielding of Crops
Owing to Drought or Other Natural Calamity: (1) If the 40major
crops are destroyed in any area in any year owing to drought or hailstone or
grass hopper or flood or any other natural calamity, the Land Revenue
Office may, if it deems it necessary to remit land revenue fully or partly,
upon holding necessary inquiry, make a submission, along with its opinion,
to Government of Nepal.
(2) If submission is made pursuant to Sub-section (1) or if
Government of Nepal comes to know such situation in any manner,
41........................... Government of Nepal shall remit such land revenue as
may be deemed necessary.

Chapter -6
Provisions Relating to Functions, Duties and Obligations of
Collecting Land Revenue
22.42 Power to exercise the powers pursuant to this Act: In recovering
land revenue pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 9, any government
office or local body may, pursuant to this Act and the Rules framed under
this Act, also exercise all powers available to the Land Revenue Office,
other than the power to auction sell land.
40 Amended by Third Amendment
41 Deleted by Finance Related Some Nepal Acts (Amendment) Act, 2047
42 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
23.43 To bear amount in question of loss and damage: If Government of
Nepal or anyone else suffers from any kind of loss or damage as a result of
any act committed by the person collecting the land revenue in contrary to
this Act or any other prevailing Nepal Law in collecting the land revenue
knowingly or with ulterior motive, the person designated in the recovery of
land revenue has to bear the amount in question of such loss and damage or
other liability. If the amount of land revenue so collected is subject to loss
and damage, action shall also be taken against him or her pursuant to the
laws in force.

Chapter -7
Provision Relating to Cultivation of Land
24.44 Prohibition on Registration or Cultivation of Public or
Governmental Land: (1) No one shall register in his or her name or
cultivate, or cause to be registered or cultivated, any governmental land or
public land.
Provided that, nothing contained in this Sub-section shall be
deemed to prevent the making provision by the Government of Nepal
of a public land for public purposes and a governmental land for any
purpose that the Government of Nepal deems appropriate.
(2) Where any person has registered any public land or
governmental land in his or her name and cultivated it prior to or after the
commencement of this Section, such registration shall ipso facto be void.
The Land Revenue Office or an authority specified by Government of
Nepal shall cross off the registration of such land standing in the name of
any person.
43 Amended by Fifth Amendment
44 Amended by Fifth Amendment
(3) The concerned Land Revenue Office shall register the
governmental land and the public land and update the records as prescribed.
Prohibition on Cultivation or non-registered Land not Registered:
No one shall cultivate or cause to be cultivated the land which has not been
registered.
Provided that, this Section shall not be deemed to prevent such land
from being cultivated after the committee prescribed pursuant to Section 26
has given approval to cultivate the land or after the land has been sold and
distributed in accordance with the prevailing Nepal law relating to
resettlement.
Cultivation of not Registered Land by Obtaining Approval: (1)
Approval has to be obtained from the prescribed committee to cultivate any
not registered land.
(2) Application has to be made to the prescribed committee for
approval to cultivate the not registered land.
(3) Only those persons who have not any land of their own up to the
prescribed ceiling as tenants or land holders shall be entitled to make
application pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) Subject to this Act and the Rules, the prescribed committee
framed under this Act and other prevailing Nepal law may grant approval to
the persons as referred to in Sub-section (3) to cultivate the not registered
land.
(5) In granting approval by the prescribed committee pursuant to
Sub-section (4), the terms for cultivation of such land and the fee therefor
shall be as prescribed.
Provided that,-
Nothing contained in this Section shall empower such
committee to grant approval to cultivate any land
prohibited from being cultivated or registered pursuant
to 45Sub-section (1) of Section 24.
The prescribed committee shall not grant approval to
any person to cultivate any land incapable of being
registered as cultivated presently in the name of such
person for any reason.
If more than one person makes an application for
approval to cultivate any land, approval shall be
granted according to the priority as prescribed.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, if settlement
is to be made in the land of any area, Government of Nepal may get the
land within the specified ceiling sold and distributed pursuant to the
prevailing Nepal law relating to resettlement.
(7) In granting approval by the prescribed committee to cultivate the
land or selling or distributing the land for settlement pursuant to Subsection (6), the prescribed committee or the concerned authority shall get
such land registered.
(8) The Land Revenue Office shall implement the decision or order
made by the concerned committee or authority under this Section in such
manner as prescribed.
45 Deleted by Fifth Amendment.

Chapter -8
Miscellaneous
Recovery of Arrears from Jimidar: The land revenue remaining due
from the Jimidar (trustee of land) at the time of abolition of Jimidari shall
be recovered according to the Jimidari records as a governmental due
pursuant to the prevailing Nepal law.
Punishment to a Person who Causes Obstruction and Hindrance
in Recovering and Collecting Land Revenue: The Chief of the Land
Revenue Office may impose a fine of up to Five Hundred Rupees on any
person who causes obstruction and hindrance in recovering and collecting
land revenue.
29.46 Punishment
Person
Registers
Cultivates
Governmental or Public Land: Any person who registers or cultivates
a governmental land or public land shall be punished by the Land Revenue
Office with a fine of One Thousand Rupees to Ten Thousand Rupees, and
such a land shall be made barren.
29A.47 Punishment to a Person Who Submits False Details: If any person
submits false details with mala fide intention in connection with the
functions and proceedings of the Land Revenue Office pursuant to
Prevailing Law, such person shall be punished by the Land Revenue Office
with a fine upto One Thousand Rupees while deciding such matter.
Punishment to a Person Who Cultivates Land Without Approval:
Any person who cultivates or causes to be cultivated any land not registered
without obtaining approval pursuant to Sub-section (4) of Section 26 shall
be punished with a fine of a sum not exceeding ten-fold of the amount of
46 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
47 Inserted by Fifth Amendment.
land revenue in question from the very year of cultivation of the land under
the prevailing Nepal Law, and the In-charge of Land Revenue Office shall
confiscate that land, and the land so confiscated shall be dealt with as
prescribed.
31.48 Appeal: An appeal may be made to the Court of Appeal against any
decision made by the Land Revenue Office under Sections 7, 8, 8B., 28, 29
and 30.
Provided that, no appeal may be made to the Court of Appeal
against any decision made by the Land Revenue Office raising the
issue of entitlement and ordering that the issue has to be settled by the
court.
To Have Such Powers as of the Court: While taking actions pursuant
to this Act, the In-charge of the Land Revenue Office shall have such
powers in respect of taking statement, issuing summons in the name of the
parties, procuring evidences and getting documents produced as the court is
entitled to exercise under the prevailing Nepal Law.
32A.49Departmental Action: If it appears that actions to be carried out by the
Land Revenue Office pursuant to this Act have been carried out in a mala
fide manner, departmental action shall be taken against the concerned
Officer or employee.
32B.50 Power to void acts and actions: If it is learnt, by a petition of anyone or
from any source, prior to the making of a complaint in the court, that a
serious error has been made by the Land Revenue Officer in making
transfer and transmission of land pursuant to this Act and amending the
details as set forth in Sub-section (3) of Section 7, the Director General of
48 Amended by Fifth Amendment.
49 Inserted by Fourth Amendment.
50 Inserted by Fifth Amendment.
Land Revenue Department may void that decision and may decide again
pursuant to law.
Power to Frame Rules: Government of Nepal may frame Rules in order
to accomplish the objectives of this Act.
Power to Remove Obstruction: If there occurs any obstruction in the
implementation of this Act, Government of Nepal may, by a Notification
published in the Nepal Gazette, issue necessary orders in order to remove
such obstruction.
To be Inoperative and Repealed: The following Nepal Laws shall be
inoperative in the Districts where this Act has commenced, and the said
Nepal Laws shall ipso facto be repealed after this Act has commenced
throughout Nepal.
Land Administration Act, 2024 (1967),
Land Revenue (Special Provision) Act, 2018 (1962),
Land Revenue (Remission) Act, 2019 (1963),
Madesh Malko Sabal,
Pahada Mal Sabal
Date of commencement of the Act and Districts
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 27 Districts from 2035-1-1 (14 April, 1978)
the Nepal Gazette, 2034-12-14 (27 April 1978):
Ilam, Jhapa, Morang, Sunsari, Udyapur, Saptari, Siraha, Sindhuli, Dhanusha, Mahottari,
Sarlahi, Rautahat, Bara, Parsa, Chitwan, Bhaktapur, Lalitpur, Kathmandu, Nawalparisi,
Rupandehi, Kapilvastu, Dang, Surkhet, Banke, Bardia, Kailali and Kanchanpur.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 5 Districts from 2035-4-1 (16 July 1978)
the Nepal Gazette, 2035-2-30 (12 June 1978):
Panchathar, Dhankuta, Ramechhap, Tanahun and Mustang.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 6 Districts from 2036-1-1 (14 April 1979)
the Nepal Gazette 2035-12-6 (19 March 1979):
Dadeldhura, Tehrathum, Kavrepalanchowk, Dhading, Palpa and Myagdi.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 3 Districts from 2036-8-15 (1 Dec. 1979)
the Nepal Gazette 2036-8-17 (3 Dec. 1979):
Makawanpur, Nuwakot and Kaski.
It was specified to commence the Act in Rasuwa District from 2038-5-1 (17 Aug. 1981) the Nepal
Gazette 2038-5-1 (17 Aug. 1981).
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 3 Districts from 2040-4-1 (17 July 1983)
the Nepal Gazette 2040-4-1 (17 July 1983):
Salyan, Baglung and Bhojpur.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 3 Districts from 2041-4-1 (16 July 1984)
the Nepal Gazette, 2041-4-1 (16 July 1984):
Gorkha, Gulmi and Syangja.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 3 Districts from 2043-4-1 (16 July 1986)
the Nepal Gazette 2043-3-9 (23 June 1986):
Parbat, Arghakhanchi and Darchula.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 2 Districts from 2045-4-1 (16 July, 1988)
the Nepal Gazettes, 2045-3-27 (11 July 1988):
Lamjung and Khotang.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 2 Districts from 2046-4-1 (16 July 1989)
the Nepal Gazette, 2046-3-26 (10 July 1989):
Doti and Taplejung.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 5 Districts from 2047-4-1 (10 July 1990)
the Nepal Gazette, 2047-4-1 (16 July 1990):
Okhaldhunga, Sindhupalchowk, Manang, Jajarkot and Phuthan.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 2 Districts from 2048-4-1 (17 July 1991)
the Nepal Gazette, 2048-4-1 (17 July 1991):
Accham and Baitadi.
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 2 Districts from 2051-4-1 (16 July 1994)
the Nepal Gazette, 2051-4-1 (16 July 1994):
Bajura and Dailekh.
It was specified to commence the Act in the Sankhuwasabha District from 2052-5-1 (17 Aug.
1995) the Nepal Gazette, 2052-5-1 (17 Aug. 1995).
It was specified to commence the Act in the Solukhumbu District from 2053-7-1 (17 Oct. 1996)
the Nepal Gazette, 2053-7-1 (17 Oct. 1996).
It was specified to commence the Act in the following 8 Districts from 2054-5-1 (17 Aug. 1997)
the Nepal Gazette, 2054-4-30 (14 Aug. 1997):-
Rukum, Rolpa, Bajhang, Kalikot, Humla, Mugu, Dolpa and Dolakha.
It was specified to commence the Act in the Jumla District from 2056-8-15 (1 Dec. 1999) the
Nepal Gazette, 2056-8-13 (29 Nov. 1999).

===== SOURCE: Local-Government-Operation-Act(2074).pdf =====

Bill designed to provide for the operation of Local Government
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to implement the provisions related to the powers of the local level
as per the Constitution of Nepal, promote cooperativeness, co-existence and coordination
between the federation, province and local level and deliver efficient and quality services by
ensuring people’s participation, accountability and transparency,
To consolidate socialism-oriented federal democratic republic governance right from the local
level as per the principle of the rule of law and sustainable development through
proportionally inclusive and just distribution of the fruits of democracy,
And to make necessary provisions in relation to the operation of the local government to
institutionalize the legislative, executive and judicial practice at the local level by
consolidating local government through development of local leadership,
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament has enacted this Act as per Article 296 (1) of the
Constitution of Nepal.

Part - 1
Preliminary
1. Brief Title and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called "The Local Governance Act,
2073."
(2) It shall come into force immediately.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act, -
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Village Executive.
(b) "Deputy Mayor" means the Deputy Mayor of the Town Executive.
(c) “Vice-chairperson” means the Vice-chairperson of the Village Executive.
(d) “Chief Administrative Officer” means the Executive Officer as per Clause 71. (84?)
(e) “Executive” means the village executive and town executive.
(f) “Rural municipality” the Rural Municipality established as per the Constitution.
(g) “Village Assembly” means the Village Assembly as per Article 222 (1) of the Constitution.
(h) “District Coordination Committee” means the district coordination committee as per

Article 220 (3) of the Constitution.
(i) "District Assembly" means the District Assembly as per Article 220 (1) of the Constitution.
(j) "Prescribed" or "As Prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the Rules made under
this Act.
(k) "Municipality" means the Municipality established as per the Constitution and the term
shall also denote the Metropolis and Sub-metropolis.
(l) “Municipal Assembly” means the municipal assembly as per Article 223 (1) of the
Constitution.
(m) “Judicial committee” means the judicial committee as per Article 217 of the Constitution.
(n) "Office-bearer" means the Chair, Mayor, Vice-chair, deputy Mayor, Ward Chair and other
members of the Executive.
(o) “Mayor” means the mayor of the town (municipal) executive.
(p) “Ministry” means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal overseeing the local level.
(q)” Plan” means the plan and programme.
(r) “Ward” means the ward of the rural municipality rural municipality or municipality.
(s) “Ward chairperson” means the chair of the ward.
(t) "Ward Committee" means the Ward Committee as per Article 222 (4) and Article 223(4) of
the Constitution.
(u) "Member" means –
(1) In the case of the Rural municipality, Member of the Village Assembly or village executive,
and this term shall also denote the Chair and Vice Chair, Ward Chair and Ward Committee
members of the village assembly or village executive.
(2) In the case of the Municipality, Member of the municipal assembly or municipal (town)
executive and this term shall also denote the Chair and Vice-chair, ward Chair and ward
committee members of the assembly or town executive.
(3) In the case of the District Council, Member of the District Council or District
Coordination Committee, and this term shall also denote the Chair and Vice Chair of the
District Coordination Committee.
(u) “Council/Assembly” means the Village Assembly or the municipal assembly.
(v) “Constitution” means the Constitution of Nepal.
(w) “Local law” means the law drafted by the village assembly or municipal/town assembly.
(x) “Local level” means the rural municipality or municipality. This term shall also denote the
district assembly.

Part - 2
Number, demarcation and centre of the rural municipality and municipality
3. Number and demarcation of rural municipality and municipality: (1) The number and
demarcation (with four corners determined) of the rural municipality and municipality shall
be determined as per Article 295 (3) of the Constitution.
(2) The Government of Nepal may, by acting within the preview of Sub-clause (3) and (4),
alter the number or demarcation of the rural municipality and municipality determined as per
Sub-clause (1) on the basis of population, geography, administrative accessibility, status
infrastructure development, economic capability, availability of natural resources, lingual,
cultural and community composition.
Provided that the number and demarcation shall not be alternated in a way to include the
rural municipality or municipality of one district into another district.
(3) If the number and demarcation of the rural municipality or municipality is to be altered, a
resolution on it must be endorsed by a two-thirds majority of the immediate existing number
of members in the rural municipality and municipality to be affected by such alteration, and
sent to the provincial government.
(4) The provincial government shall recommend to the Government of Nepal to alter the
number or demarcation of the rural municipality or municipality as per the resolution within
fifteen days upon receiving the proposal as per Sub-clause (3).
4. Name and Centre of rural municipality and municipality: (1) The Government of Nepal
shall, in consultation with the provincial government, designate the name and centre of the
rural municipality and municipality.
(2) The minimum standards of the area of land, physical infrastructure and other matters
essential for the naming and centre of the rural municipality and municipality shall be as
determined by the Government of Nepal.
(3) To change the name and centre of the rural municipality or municipality, the executive
shall make a request, through the provincial government, before the government of Nepal
along with a resolution endorsed by two-thirds majority of the immediate existing number of
members of the concerned assembly.
(4) If the resolution received as per Sub-clause (3) is found to be appropriate, the Government
of Nepal may change the centre of such rural municipality or municipality.
(5) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Clause, if a recommendation to
change the name or centre of the rural municipality or municipality is made to the
Government of Nepal within 6 months of the first election of rural municipality or
municipality and for one time including a resolution endorsed by a majority of the immediate
existing members of the concerned assembly then the Government of Nepal shall change the
name or centre as per the recommendation.
(6) While making recommendation to change the centre as per this Clause, it should be done
within the standards mentioned in Sub-clause (2).
(7) If the centre of any rural municipality or municipality is changed, then the information
about the same should be given to the provincial government.
(8) If the name of any rural municipality or municipality happens to become similar with the
name of another rural municipality or municipality then the Government of Nepal may
suggest, through the provincial government, the concerned rural municipality or municipality
to change such name.
(9) Upon receiving a suggestion as per Sub-clause (8), the Executive shall change the name of
the rural municipality or municipality following the procedures as per Sub-clause (3) and send
it to the Government of Nepal through the provincial government.
5. Number, demarcation and centre of Ward: (1) The Government of Nepal shall determine
the demarcation and number of wards to remain within a rural municipality and
municipality.
(2) While determining the number as per Sub-clause (1), the Government of Nepal shall
determine in a way to establish at least five and a maximum of twenty-one wards in a rural
municipality and at least nine and a maximum of thirty-five wards in a municipality.
(3) The Assembly shall, on the recommendation of the concerned ward and on the following
basis, designate the centre of the ward with the endorsement of a resolution by a majority of
the existing number of members:
(a) The population and situation of the population distribution,
(b) The geographical/territorial continuity, accessibility and uniqueness,
(c) Lingual, cultural and social speciality,
(d) Situation of distribution of services and accessibility,
(e) Existing physical infrastructure.
6. Number and demarcation of Ward may be altered: (1) The Government of Nepal may,
as required, alter the number and demarcation of the ward determined as per Clause 5.
(2) The conditions mentioned in Sub-clause (3) of Clause 5 must be adopted while altering the
number and demarcation of the ward as per Sub-clause (1).
(3) If it is necessary to alter the number or demarcation of the ward, a resolution endorsed by
two-thirds majority of the existing number of members of the village assembly or municipal
assembly should be sent to the Government of Nepal through the Provincial government.
(4) Upon receiving the resolution as per Sub-clause (3), the Government of Nepal should alter
the number or demarcation of the ward as per the resolution within six months.
(5) Any alteration in the number and demarcation as per this Clause should be done at least
one year prior to the election of the village municipality and municipality.
(6) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Clause, if a recommendation to
change the demarcation of the ward is made to the Government of Nepal through the
provincial government within six months of the first election of rural municipality or
municipality including a resolution endorsed by a two-thirds majority of the immediate
existing members of the concerned village assembly or municipal assembly then the
Government of Nepal may alter the demarcation of the ward.
(7) If it is necessary to alter the centre of any ward, then on the recommendation of the Ward
Committee, a two-thirds majority of the existing members of the village assembly or
municipal assembly can endorse a proposal to change the centre of the ward.
Provided that for the first time since the commencement of this Act, the centre of the ward
can be altered by endorsing a proposal with a majority of the existing members of the village
assembly or municipal assembly.
(8) The physical infrastructure and other provisions required to alter the centre of the ward as
per Sub-clause (7) should be managed through the internal income of the concerned rural
municipality or municipality.
(9) If the centre of the ward is altered as per Sub-clause (7), then the concerned rural
municipality or municipality should communicate it to the provincial government and the
Government of Nepal within thirty-five days.
(10) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Clause, the Government of Nepal
may include the ward of any rural municipality or municipality into adjoining another rural
municipality or municipality.
(11) While including any ward as per Sub-clause (10) a resolution on it should be endorsed by a
two-thirds majority of the immediate existing number of members of the assembly of the rural
municipality or municipality where the ward remains and where it is to be included, and it
should be sent to the Government of Nepal through the provincial government.
7. Rural municipality or municipality to merge among one another:
(1) Two or more than two municipality and municipality, rural municipality and rural
municipality or municipality and rural municipality with shared borders within any district
can take a decision to merge with one another through a majority of the immediate existing
number of members of the concerned assembly.
(2) While deciding to merge as per Sub-clause (1), the details of the name, borders, centre and
wards of municipality or rural municipality to be maintained after the merger should be sent
to the provincial government.
(3) The provincial government shall make an analysis of the financial and social aspect of the
proposal received as per Sub-clause (3) and make a recommendation within thirty days before
the Government of Nepal.
(4) On the basis of the recommendation as per Sub-clause (3), if the Government of Nepal
decides to merge rural municipality and municipality with one another, then it shall designate
the name of such rural municipality or municipality, number of wards and demarcation and
centre.
(5) The decision reached to merge any municipality or rural municipality as this Clause shall
be implemented by after the elections to be held soon after it.
(6) The rural municipality or municipality to be maintained after merger as per this Clause
should be provided with additional grant in addition to the grants being provided prior to the
merger by the Government of Nepal and provincial government.
8. Classification of municipality: (1) The Government of Nepal may declare a municipality,
sub-metropolis or metropolis based on fulfilling the conditions and facilities as follows:
(a) Municipality:
(1) At least ten thousand population in the Himalayan region of the mountainous district, at
least forty thousand in the hilly area of the mountain district and in hilly district, and at least
fifty thousand in districts in inner Madhesh, at least seventy-five thousand in the Tarai
districts and at least one hundred thousand in the districts within Kathmandu valley.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this Clause, the mountainous district, hilly district, inner
Madhesh, Tarai district and districts in Kathmandu valley shall denote the districts as
mentioned in Schedule-1.
(2) With average annual domestic income of at least ten million rupees for the past five years
for the Himalayan region and at least thirty million rupees for other districts,
(3) Minimum urban facilities including roads, pavement, power, drinking water,
communications and others.
(4) Proper arrangement of waste management and landfill site,
(5) Open space and park as prescribed in every ward,
(6) At least 25-bed hospital facilities,
(7) Bus park with passenger resting zone and public toilets,
(8) Drinking water and sanitation, sewage management and processing,
(9) Bank and financial institutions,
(10) Community building and meeting hall,
(11) Market area,
(12) Butchery house,
(13) Cremation site,
(14) Sports ground
(15) Having prepared urban/town master-plan,
(16) Fulfilled other standards as prescribed and having other urban facilities.
(b) Sub-metropolis
(1) With at least two hundred thousand permanent residents,
(2) With average income of at least two hundred and fifty million rupees in the latest five
years, annual internal income
(3) With 200-bed hospital facility including at least one 100-bed general hospital,
(4) Waste management processing and management system,
(5) Meeting hall,
(6) National-level stadium, covered hall,
(7) Availability of Power, drinking water and communications services,
(8) Major roads in the town blacktopped/concrete,
(9) High-level education and technical education facilities,
(110) Public parks and town meeting hall,
(11) Modern butchery and managed cremation site,
(12) Disabled friendly public utility places and buildings, and physically accessible,
(13) Tourist standard hotel, motel and resort
(14) Other infrastructure prescribed for a municipality
(15) Other urban facilities as prescribed
(c) Metropolis
(1) With at least five hundred thousand population
(2) With annual average internal income of at least one billion rupees in the past five years,
(3) Bus park along with terminal, sufficient facilities for parking, sub-way, pedestrian way,
(4) With facility of metro transport, disabled friendly public transportation service,
(5) At least seventy-five per cent of the total road length is concrete,
(6) Education institutions providing post-graduate (master’s) level education programme,
(7) Specialized service hospital and at least five hundred bed-hospital facility with at least one
100-bed general hospital
(8) Managed vegetable and fruit sales centre,
(9) Shopping malls,
(10) Stadium appropriate to run international level sports,
(11) Easy access to arrival longue of international-level airport
(12) Provision of international-level meeting hall and international-level business exhibition
centre,
(13) Museum
(14) Technical schools
(15) International standard hotel facility
(16) Protected heritage of special importance within the area
(17) Sufficient entertainment centres,
(18) Children's park and elderly citizen entertainment site,
(19) Theatre and creative gallery,
(20) Urban greenery and beauty
(21) Other urban facilities as prescribed
(2) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (2), it shall not obstruct to maintain
the municipality, sub-metropolis or metropolis that exist at the commencement of this Act.
9. Cultural or tourist area to be declared: (1) The provincial government my, if it finds
appropriate to protect or promote tourism of the historically important, archaeological object,
art or culture of any rural municipality or municipality, determine a standard for the same and
declare any rural municipality or municipality or any area of it as a cultural or tourist centre.
(2) The provincial government may provide special programme and budget for the
development of cultural or tourist centre declared as per Sub-clause (1).
(3) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (1), the rural municipality or
municipality may declare any location within its area as cultural or tourist zone.
10. To be published in Nepal gazette: The Government of Nepal shall publish the decisions
taken in the following matters in the Nepal gazette:
(a) Determination of the number and demarcation of the rural municipality and municipality
and its alteration,
(b) Name of rural municipality and municipality, and its alteration,
(c) The number of ward of the rural municipality and municipality, determination of its
borders with four corners cleared, centre of the ward and its alteration,
(d) Merger of rural municipality and municipality with one another,
(e) Declaration of municipality, sub-metropolis and metropolis.

Chapter-3
Function, duties and rights of rural municipality and municipality
11. Function, duties and rights of rural municipality and municipality: (1) The exclusive
rights of the rural municipality and municipality shall be as mentioned in Schedule-8 of the
Constitution.
(2) The function, duties and rights of the rural municipality and municipality, without
adversely affecting the universality of Sub-clause (1), are as follows:
a. Municipal police
1. To operate, management and regulate municipal police and develop policy, law, standards
relating to municipal police,
2. To mobilize municipal police to support with the following tasks:
(a) Implementation of the policy, law, standards and decisions formulated by itself,
(b) Protection and safe guarding of its asset,
(c) Management of celebrations, functions fairs and festivals held at the local level
(d) Management of local market and parking area,
(e) Implementation of standards relating to village and urban sanitation,
(f) Implementation of the reconciliation and verdicts of the judicial committee,
(g) Preservation and security of its office premises, heritage, public, unregistered land, public
building and physical infrastructure
(h) Disaster management related search, rescue, relief and rehabilitation,
(i) Controlling unauthorized advertisements and hoarding board,
(j) Controlling of stray livestock and cattle,
(k) Preventing and controlling unauthorized construction and encroachment of public
property,
(l) Other tasks prescribed by the Executive.
b. Cooperatives institution
1. Determination of the local policy, law, standards relating to cooperatives,
implementation and regulation,
2. Registration, license, cancellation and dissolution of local cooperatives institution,
3. Determination of local standards relating to cooperatives savings and credit
mobilization, and its regulation,
4. Coordination and collaboration with national, central, thematic, provincial and local
institutions related to cooperatives,
5. Local data management and study, research related to cooperatives,
6. Capacity building of local cooperatives,
7. Promote, mobilize and develop the local cooperatives sector.
c. FM (radio) operation
(1) Permission, renewal and regulation of operation of FM Radio (station) up to 100 watts
(2) Others acts relating to operation of FM under the preview of the provincial law.
d. Local tax, service charge and fee
(1) Policy, law, standards, enforcement and regulation relating to property tax, house rent tax,
house registration fee, vehicle tax, service charge, tourism fee, advertisement tax, business tax,
land tax, entertainment tax within the preview of the federal and provincial law.
(2) Local infrastructure and service fee determination, collection and management,
(3) Fee for trekking, Kayaking, Canoeing, Bungee jump, Zip Flyer and rafting motorboat, cable
care service and other noble tourist service and adventure sports in water and land area,
(4) Determination and collection of herbs, scrap and animal tax,
(5) Expansion and promotion of grounds for local revenue,
(6) Stones, pebbles, sand, mud, timber and firewood, roots, slate, limestone and other natural
goods and minerals sales and export fee collection,
(7) Determination and collection of fee for recommendation, registration, permit, renewal etc.
(8) Incentive for promotion of local revenue,
(9) Exchange of revenue information and data,
(10) Policy, law, standards and regulation related to revenue leakage control at the local level
within the preview of federal and provincial law,
(11) Policy, law, standards and regulation related to service charge on local infrastructure
service and use,
(12) Land revenue collection,
(13) Other acts related to tax and service charge
e. Local service management
(1) Policy, standard, service conditions, plan, implementation and regulation related to local
service management,
(2) Formation, operation and management of local services as per the law and as required
within the limit of financial resources after the adjustment of employees as per Article 302 (2)
of the Constitution,
(3) Organisation development, human resource management and career development,
(4) Management, use and coordination of employees coming after the adjustment from the
central government under transition management,
(5) Determination of organizational structure and posts determination as per the local law,
(6) Use, promotion and regulation of information and communications technology I local
service management,
(7) Other acts related to local service management.
f. Local data and records compilation
(1) Policy, law, standards, plan, implementation and regulation related to local data,
(2) Basic data collection and management,
(3) Records and Registration Management of birth, death, marriage, divorce, migration and
family data,
(4) Data collection management with Information and communications technology,
(6) Other acts relating to local data and records compilation.
g. Local level development plans and projects
(1) Policy, legislation, standards, plan and regulation related to development plan and projects,
(2) Formulation, implementation monitoring and evaluation of plans and projects necessary
for economic, social, cultural, environmental, technological and infrastructure development,
(3) Study, research and impact assessment of project,
(4) Records management of feasible natural resources,
(5) Policy, legislation, standards relating to urban development, settlement development and
building under the preview of federal and provincial law, and related project formulation,
project identification, study, implementation and regulation
(6) Approval to build construction and regulation as per the national building code and
standards
(7) Construction and renovation of government building, school, community building,
meeting hall and other public building and structures,
(8) Coordination, facilitation and support in federal and province-level plan and projects,
(9) Safe human settlement development policy, plan, programme formulation,
implementation, monitoring, regulation and evaluation,
(10) Issuance, renewal and repealing of ‘D’ category of license for public construction works as
per the prevalent law,
(11) Identification, implementation, management and monitoring and evaluation of projects
related to tourism sector development, expansion and promotion,
(12) Identification, implementation, management, monitoring and evaluation of innovative
tourism services and works,
(13) Other works related to development projects and plan.
h. Basic and secondary education
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans for early childhood development and
education, basic education, parental education, informal education, open
and alternative continuous learning, community learning,
2. Establishment, approval, operation, management and regulation of
community, organizational, guthi and cooperative schools,
3. Planning, operation, approval, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
technical education and vocational training,
4. Approval, monitoring and regulation of schools providing education in
mother tongue,
5. Property management of the schools which have been merged or closed
6. Establishment and management of village and municipal level education
committees,
7. Establishment and management of school management committees,
8. Naming the school,
9. Land ownership; documentation, protection and management of
properties of the community schools,
10. Quality enhancement of schools and reading materials distribution,
11. Positions for teachers and staff in community schools,
12. Mapping, approval, authorization, adjustment and regulation of school,
13. Educational infrastructure, maintenance, operation and management of
community schools,
14. Operation, monitoring and management of basic level exams,
15. Testing and management of students’ learning outcomes,
16. Management of free education, student motivation and scholarships,
17. Approval and regulation of teaching outside of school, like tuitions and
coaching
18. Protection, promotion and standardisation of local level knowledge, skills
and technology,
19. Operation and management of local libraries and reading rooms,
20. Coordination and regulation of education programs up to secondary
level,
21. Management of grants and its budget for the community schools,
establishment of accounting discipline for income and expenditure of
school, its monitoring and regulation,
22. Teaching learning, training for teachers and staff, capacity development,
23. Operation of extracurricular activities.
basic health and sanitation
Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to basic health, sanitation
and nutrition,
Operation and promotion of basic health, reproductive health, and
nutrition services,
Establishment and operation of hospitals and other health institutions,
Physical infrastructure development and management for health
services,
Setting of standards for clean drinking water and food, control and
regulation of air and noise pollution,
Awareness raising on sanitation and management of health-related
wastes,
Collection, recycling, processing and disposal of health-related wastes,
and determination and regulation of these services,
Blood transfusion service, and local and urban health services,
Permission, monitoring and regulation of pharmacies/medicine shops
operation,
10. Coordination, collaboration and partnerships with private and nongovernmental sectors for management of waste produced from
sanitation and health sectors,
11. Services, permits, monitoring, and regulation related to family-planning
and mother-child welfare
12. Reduction, prevention, control and management of malnutrition in
women and children.
j. Local market management, environment protection and bio-diversity
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to local trade; demand,
supply and monitoring of goods; consumer rights and welfare,
2. Market and village market management,
3. Projection of local goods production, supply and export, price
determination and monitoring,
4. Infrastructure development for local commerce and trade,
5. Monitoring and regulation of price and quality of local goods and
services,
6. Registration, permits, renewal, writing off, monitoring and regulation of
local business firms,
7. Data system and research studies on local commerce,
8. Cooperation and coordination with private and non-governmental
sector,
9. Promotion, facilitation and regulation of local commerce,
10. Protection, promotion, and documentation of local intellectual
properties,
11. Awareness raising of consumers, data management of target consumers,
and quality testing of local goods and services,
12. Formulation of local policies laws, standards and plans related to
environmental protection and biodiversity, and their implementation,
monitoring and regulation,
13. Environmental risk reduction at local level,
14. Control, monitoring and regulation in sale and consumption of
consumer goods having negative health effects, and goods which cause
environmental pollution and damage,
15. Sanitation and waste management at local level,
16. Adoption of low-carbon and environment-friendly development at local
level,
17. Protection and promotion of green areas at local level,
18. Allocation and management of environment protection area at the local
level,
19. Local market management, environment protection and biodiversity
related works.
k. Local road, rural road, agro road and irrigation
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to local, rural and agriculture
roads and irrigation,
2. Master-plan formulation, implementation, maintenance and regulation
of local, rural and agriculture roads, suspension bridge, pedestrian
bridge, irrigation and dams,
3. Construction, operation, oversight, maintenance, upgrading,
monitoring and regulation of local level irrigation system,
4. Management and regulation of transport safety,
5. Other works related to local roads, rural roads and agriculture roads.
l. Village assembly, town assembly, mediation and arbitration management
1. Policies, laws and working modality for village assembly and town
assembly,
2. Policies and strategies, periodic and annual plans, programs and budget
approval for local level thematic areas,
3. Formation and operation of committees of the assembly,
4. Joint committee formation for common issues and partnership issues,
among the local levels,
5. Discussion and necessary direction based on reports submitted by
executive bodies and judicial committee,
6. Direction to the executive body for effective implementation of
development plans and programs and good governance,
7. Regulation of topics which cause financial burden to the rural
municipalities and municipalities,
8. Local mediation and arbitration,
9. Other related works on village assembly, town assembly, mediation and
arbitration management.
m. Local records management
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to local records management,
2. Affiliation in national and local information system with latest
technology after collection and processing of data on demographic,
natural, economic, social, physical infrastructure, employment
condition, gross domestic product, per capita income, human
development and gender empowerment index, including revenues and
income vs expenditure; and updated recording of background pictures
and resource maps,
3. Establishment and operation of information and documentation
centre/archive,
4. Updated detailed record of public properties, community properties,
buildings, roads, shops and businesses,
5. Details of completed and ongoing projects within the region and
updated record of these project properties,
6. Use of latest information technology in local records management,
7. Other works related to local records management.
n. Land ownership certificate distribution
1. Cadastral mapping of local land, plot boundaries, revision of owner
information (haalsabik), registration of ownership transfer, and records
dismissal,
2. Land ownership registration certificate distribution and records
management,
3. Record keeping according to land classification,
4. Coordination and facilitation in land acquisition for public use, decision
and distribution of compensation,
5. Coordination and facilitation in works related to land mapping and
determining the land ownership,
6. Other works related to land ownership certificate distribution.
o. Agriculture and animal husbandry, agro production management, livestock health,
cooperatives,
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to agriculture and animal
husbandry, agro production management and livestock health,
2. Operation, monitoring and regulation of programs on agriculture and
livestock market information, infrastructure construction of market and
village market, small irrigation construction, training, technology
transfer, technical support, agriculture materials supply and farmers
capacity development,
3. Control of agriculture and livestock borne natural disasters and
epidemics,
4. Management of livestock health services,
5. Protection of agriculture environment and biodiversity conservation
and promotion,
6. Development and management of livestock breed improvement
methods,
7. Promotion, development and marketing of high value agricultural
products,
8. Development and management of local grazing lands,
9. Regulation of quality of animal feeds,
10. Data management and information system on local level livestock,
11. Management and regulation of slaughterhouse and cold storage,
12. Facilitation in livestock insurance and loans,
13. Other works related to livestock and livestock health.
p. Elderly citizen, people with disabilities and physically challenged management
1. Implementation, operation and management of social security
programs according to local provincial and federal laws,
2. Updating of records of elderly citizen, people with disabilities and
physically challenged, identity cards distribution, management and
distribution of social security and benefits,
3. Operation and management of elderly citizens clubs, day-care centres,
meeting spaces, and shelters,
4. Operation and management of disabled rehabilitation centres, elderly
citizens centres and physically challenged care centres, in coordination
with federation and province,
5. Operation, management, monitoring and regulation of rehabilitation
centres for the street children, orphans, physically and mentally
challenged,
6. Other works related to management of elderly citizen, people with
disabilities and physically challenged.
q. Data collection of unemployed
1. Data collection, processing and information system establishment for
employed and unemployed labour force,
2. Records collection and information management of domestic and
foreign labourers at the local level,
3. Data collection and management about competent human resources in
different sectors and subjects,
4. Safe foreign employment; information and data collection and
management of labour force who are in foreign employment,
5. Management and operation of employment information centres,
6. Financial literacy and skills training for the labour force going in foreign
employment,
7. Social reunification of returnee migrant workers,
8. Use of knowledge, skills and entrepreneurship gained during foreign
employment,
9. Other works related to data collection of unemployment.
r. Agro expansion management, operation and control
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to agricultural expansion,
2. Projection, management and mobilization of agricultural expansion and
human resource,
3. Capacity enhancement, technical service, support, skill development
and empowerment of farmers,
4. Supply, use and regulation of agricultural seeds, breeds, fertilizers,
chemicals and medicines,
5. Coordination, management and regulation of farmer groups, agriculture
cooperatives and local organizations related to agriculture,
6. Conservation and handing down of local level agriculture related
technologies,
7. Publicity of agriculture related information,
8. Development and management of local level resource centres,
9. Promotion and publicity of organic farming and fertilizers,
10. Other works related to management, operation and control of
agricultural expansion.
s. Drinking water, small hydropower project, alternative energy
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
policies, laws, standards and plans related to local drinking water,
2. Determination of drinking water fees and drinking water service
management,
3. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
local level policies, laws, standards and plans related to hydro power
projects up to one megawatt,
4. Formulation, implementation, and regulation of local level policies,
laws, standards and plans related to alternative energy,
5. Management, operation and regulation of local electricity distribution
system and services,
6. Technology development and handover, capacity development and
promotion related to alternative energy at the local level,
7. Other works related to drinking water, micro hydro projects and
alternative energy.
t. Disaster management
1. Formulation, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and regulation of
local policies, laws, standards and plans related to disaster
management,
2. Local level disaster preparedness and response plan, early warning
system, search and rescue, pre-storage, distribution and coordination of
relief materials,
3. Local dams, river and landslide control and management and regulation
of rivers,
4. Mapping of disaster risk areas, and identification and relocation of
settlements,
5. Support, coordination and cooperation with federal, provincial and
local communities, organizations and private sector for disaster
management,
6. Establishment and operation of disaster management fund and resource
mobilization,
7. Formulation, implementation, monitoring and regulation of local level
projects related to disaster risk reduction,
8. Local level rehabilitation and reconstruction after disaster,
9. Data management and research studies related to local level disasters,
10. Local emergency work operation system,
11. Operation of community based disaster management programs,
12. Other works related to disaster management.
u. Watershed, wildlife, mines and minerals preservation
1. Implementation and regulation of local policies, laws, standards and
plans related to watershed, wildlife, mines and minerals preservation
2. Water source conservation,
3. Community soil conservation and income generation programs based
on that,
4. Community adaptation for soil conservation and watershed
management,
5. Information and data collection related to mines and minerals,
6. Support in preservation and conservation of valuable metals, stones and
minerals,
7. Registration, permit, renewal, dismissal and management of survey,
extraction and use of mined goods like boulders, pebbles, sand, salt,
soil, slates, graphite, etc,
8. Publication of geological maps.
v. Language, culture and fine art protection and development
(1) Local-level Policy, legislation, standard, plan, implementation and regulation related to
language, culture and fine art,
(2) Protection, maintenance, promotion and development of archaeological, ancient memorial
and museum,
(3) Operation and management of traditional fair and festivals
(4) Other works related to protection and development of language, culture and fine art,
(5) Social mobilization work against ill-traditions and harmful practices that are against the
prevalent law.
(3) The concurrent rights to be exercised by the rural municipality and municipality jointly
with the federation and province shall be as mentioned in Schedule-9 of the Constitution.
(4) The function, duties and rights of the rural municipality and municipality shall be as
follows under the purview of the federal and provincial law on the following subjects without
having adverse impact on the universality of Sub-clause (3):
a. Sports and newspaper
(1) Local-level sports structure infrastructure construction, operation and development,
(2) Regulation and coordination of sports administration and associations at the local level
(3) Sports development and promotion
(4) Sports tournament organising and participation
(5) Sports related infrastructure development
(6) Registration, records and regulation of local level newspapers
b. Health
(1) Determination of local level health target and standards as per the federal and provincial
target and standards,
(2) Clinic registration, operation license and regulation of general hospital, nursing home,
diagnosis centre and other health institutes,
(3) Production, processing and distribution of medical plants, herbs and other medical goods
at the local level
(4) Health insurance and other social security programme management,
(5) Determination and regulation of minimum price of medicine s and other medical products
at the local level
(6) Proper use of medicines at the local level and micro-organism resilience minimization
(7) Purchase, storage and distribution of medical and medical equipment at the local level,
(8) Management of local level health information system
(9) Public health surveillance at the local level
(10) Operation of promotional, defensive, curative, rehabilitative and palliative health service
at the local level
(11) Promotion of health lifestyle, nutrition, physical exercise, yoga, following health circle,
panchakarma and other public health service,
(12) Control and management of pests and diseases,
(13) Control of the use of tobacco, alcohol and drugs and awareness raising,
(14) Ayurvedic, Yunani, Amchi, homeopathic, natural medicine and other traditional medical
treatment service management
(15) Public health, emergency health and epidemic control plan and enforcement
(16) Disease control and prevention
(17) Emergency health service supply and local service management
c. Power, drinking water, irrigation and other services
(1) Power distribution system and service management
(2) Drinking water tariff determination and drinking water service management
(3) Local small surface and underground irrigation system operation and renovation, service
fee determination and collection management
d. Service fee, tariff, penalty, and royalty received from natural resource, tourism fee
(1) Policy, legislation, standards, plan formulation, implementation and regulation of local
service fee, tariff, penalty.
(2) Collection of royalty like natural resources and service fee, coordination and regulation
(3) Minerals exploration and royalty collection
(4) Collection of royalty received from community forest operation and management
(5) Collection of royalty received from Water mill, canal and drain
e. Forest, wildlife, birds, water use, environment, ecology and bio-diversity
(1) Local policy, legislation, standard, plan related to Forest, wildlife, birds, water use,
environment, ecology and bio-diversity, implementation and regulation
(2) Preservation, promotion, use and regulation of community, rural and urban, religious and
lease forests at the local level, and management of forest users group,
(3) Management of community, religious and lease forest in the buffer zone,
(4) River bank, river outlet, river bank and road side afforestation management at the local
level
(5) Promotion and regulation of private and commercial forest at the local level
(6) Afforestation, maintenance, use and management in the public barren land, stop and area
at the local level
(7) Survey, production, collection, promotion, processing and market management of herbs
and other non-timber forest products at the local level,
(8) Forest seed garden establishment, management and promotion
(9) Nursery establishment, saplings production, distribution, planting and promotion
(10) Protection of wildlife and birds, commercial breeding, use and monitoring
(11) Management of conflict between human and wildlife,
(12) Local zoo establishment and operation,
(13) Local wildlife tourism and income generation,
(14) Local level trophies (animal parts) management
(15) Documentation and study research of forest, wildlife, and birds at the local level,
(16) Records of memorial in the world heritage list and archeologically important forest,
wetlands, coastal area land
(17) Control of encroaching species
(18) Local level risk minimization
(19) Documentation of bio-diversity
(20) Greenery promotion at the local level
(21) Regional project formulation, implementation and monitoring related to local small water
(22) Protection and promotion of local species
(23) Environment risk minimization at the local level
(24) Local level pollution control and regulation and management of hazardous materials
(25) Low carbon and environment-friendly development adoption at the local level
(26) Determination of environment protection area at the local level and its management
f. Social security and poverty alleviation
(1) Local policy, legislation, standards, regulation and study research related to social security
and poverty alleviation
(2) Local plan, program, resource mobilization and management of targeted group
(3) Contact, coordination and collaboration with Federation, province and local association for
implementation of social security
(4) Social security related local data and information management
(5) Poor household identification related local survey, information management and
regulation
(6) Local social security plan and management
g. Personal incident, birth, death, marriage and data
(1) Registration of personal incident (birth, death, marriage, migration, divorce, adopted
child),
(2) Local policy, legislation, standards, plan, implementation and regulation related to local
data of personal incidents
(3) Records management and report of personal incidents (vital registration)
h. Protection, promotion and reconstruction of archaeological, ancient memorial and museum
at the local level
i. Landless squatters' management
(1) Identification of landless squatters and records management
(2) Livelihood related to landless squatters and accommodation management
j. Royalty received from natural resources
(1) Policy, legislation, standards and regulation related to royalty received from natural
resources
(2) Collection and sharing of the royalty received from natural resources
k. Vehicle permit
(1) Local policy, legislation, standards, plan, implementation and regulation related to
transport management
(2) Route determination of local public transport, permit, renewal, dissolution, determination
of quality and fare of service and regulation
(3) Promotion of environment-friendly, climate change adaptation, disaster risk assessed,
disability and gender-friendly transport system at the local level
5. In addition to the rights mentioned in the Sub-clause (1) and (3), other function, duties and
rights of the rural municipality and municipality is as follows:
a. Land management
(1) Formulation and implementation of land use policy, plan and programme of the local level
under the federal and provincial law,
(2) Formulation and implementation of managed settlement development programme under
the federal and provincial standards, land integration and land development and management
for integrated settlement development
(3) Management of unorganized settlement at the local level
b. Communications service
(1) Permit, renewal and regulation of internet service, telecentre, cable and wireless television
transmission at the local area under the federal and provincial law
(2) Development and promotion of information technology at the local level
c. Transport service
(1) Implementation, monitoring and regulation of policy, standards, plans of mass transit
system of medium capacity like local bus, trolley bus, tram,
(2) Utilization of national rail infrastructure and operation, management, maintenance,
coordination, partnership and collaboration of urban railway service within the metropolitan
area.
6. The federation or province may delegate any matter under its jurisdiction as per the
constitution and prevalent law to the rural municipality or municipality by drafting a law.
7. The rural municipality or municipality shall develop and enforcement law, policy, plan,
standards and procedures as required while exercising the function, duties and rights as per
Sub-clause (1), (3), (4) and (5).
8. The local level may, in consultation with the provincial government and prior approval of
the Government of Nepal, maintain sisterly relations with any foreign local government.
12. Function, duties and rights of ward committee: (1) The function, duties and rights of
the ward committee shall be as prescribed by the executive.
(2) Until the function, duties and rights are prescribed by the executive as per Sub-clause (1),
the function, duties and rights of the ward committee shall be as follows:
a. Formulation, implementation and monitoring of plan within the ward
(1) As per the participatory project formulation system, adopt the process of formulation of
settlement or tole-level planning, and collect, prioritize and select the settlement and tolelevel plan,
(2) Formation and mobilization of Tole development organisation and formation and
monitoring of the users committee for projects to be carried out within the ward
(3) Protection, maintenance, care and management of the plan and physical infrastructure
within the ward,
b. Data updating and preserving
(1) Maintaining record of private house and households,
(2) Maintaining record of heritage of historical, archaeological, cultural and religious
importance, ancient memorial, public and community building, public, unregistered land,
(3) Maintain record of the open ground, chowk, ghat, pati, pauwa, sattal, dharmashala,
temples, monasteries, mosques, madarsa, unregistered land, hills, pasture land, water sources,
pond, lake, well, tap, stone tap, guthi home, road, trail, bridge, canal, water mill, and update it,
protect them, and prepare an updated map including disaggregated data and information,
c. Development work
(1) Manage child park
(2) Operate and manage informal education programme and early childhood development
centre,
(3) Operate and manage library, bachanalaya, community learning centres, child clubs and
child networks,
(4) Manage ward-level health centre and sub-health centre,
(5) Manage BCG, polio vaccines, vitamin a for the children
(6) Run nutrition programme,
(7) Run health awareness development and health information programme at the ward level,
(8) Run, cause to run urban and rural health clinics,
(9) Construction and management of public toilet and bathrooms,
(10) Managing ward-level community water tap, pond, well and lake construction, protection
and quality regulation,
(11) Collection and management of solid waste produced from homes, sanitation of chowk and
gallies, sewage, management of carcasses, outlet of ground water and protection of water
sources,
(12) Establishment, coordination and promotion of agriculture and fruit nursery, and training
orientation of water-level leading farmers,
(13) Compilation of demand for agro fertilizer,
(14) Preparing the list of pests (diseases) in agriculture,
(15) Livestock development and management of stray animal,
(16) Protection and management of pasture land within the ward,
(17) Organise art, theatre, awareness oriented and cultural programme for the development of
the local community’s festival, language and culture,
(18) Preserve and promote cultural traditions and customs that highlight the local uniqueness,
(19) Development of sports infrastructure development in the ward,
(20) Running of inter-school and child club level sports programmes,
(21) Maintaining, and help maintain the running condition of roads within the ward,
(22) Avoid encroachment and obstruction in the road way within the ward,
(23) Remove floods, landslides in the roads,
(24) Compilation of cost of domestic industry and identification of feasibility,
(25) Promotion of cottage industry within the ward,
(26) Registration of personal incidents as per the prevalent law, updating it and preserving the
records of it,
(27) Run public awareness programme related to registration of personal incidents,
(28) Social security allowance distribution and updating records,
(29) Making the ward child-friendly,
(30) Maintaining a record of the economic and socially backward women, children, dalit,
people with disabilities, elderly citizen, minorities, marginalised community, and work on
social and economic upliftment,
(31) Promote social goodwill and harmony among various communities,
(32) Abolish social ill-traditions and superstition like child marriage, violence against women,
untouchability, dowry, haliya system, chaupadi, kamlari system, child labour, human
trafficking, illiteracy,
(33) Assess and collect the land tax and revenue, business tax, rent tax, advertisement tax, paid
parking, new business registration, recommendation fee, vehicle tax, entertaining tax, and
submit the amount along with report to the concerned rural municipality or municipality,
(34) Take the unclaimed and helpless sick to the nearby hospital or health centre for medical
treatment,
(35) In case of the death of helpless or unclaimed person, then make arrangement for the final
rites,
(36) Rescue and rehabilitate street children,
(37) Preserve and promote the community forest, forest heritage and bio-diversity within the
ward,
(38) Expand, cause to expand greenery in the ward, tole and settlements,
(39) Make the ward environment-friendly
(40) Run promotional acts like organic fertilizer, safe motherhood, student’s enrolment, full
immunization, open defecation free, sanitation, environment-friendly and child-friendly
governance.
(41) Promotion of home-stay tourism within the ward.
d. Regulation work
(1) Regulate the acts of the development plan, project and associated users committee
operating in the ward
(2) Monitor whether the construction of houses area of quality and as per the building code
and standards, provide earthquake resistant building construction training to masons and
carpenters,
(3) Protect consumers’ interest by monitoring the quality and price list of the food, fish, meat,
vegetables, fruits, drinks and consumable goods,
(4) Promote and maintain record of industries and businesses within the ward,
(5) Management of haat bazaar,
(6) Check power leakage and theft.
e. Recommendation and certification
(1) Certifying kinship,
(2) Recommending for citizenship and copy of citizenship,
(3) Recommending the accounts of rent tax,
(4) Stay witness to opening of rooms,
(5) Recommending the deduction of tenant cost,
(6) Recommending the accounts of house land tax,
(7) Certifying the date of birth,
(8) Recommending closure of business, not operated of business or that business did not take
place at all,
(9) Recommendation to register the petition of medication (reconciliation),
(10) Certification of married and unmarried,
(11) Recommendation for free or paid health treatment,
(12) Recommendation and certification in English medium
(13) Certifying homes
(14) Certifying personal details
(15) Recommending to maintain house in the land ownership certificate
(16) Recommending that the person with different names, caste, date of birth and certified
name is of the same person,
(17) Recommendation for change in the name, caste date of birth,
(18) Recommendation of lost of land ownership certificate
(19) Certifying documents and consent paper,
(20) Recommending kittakat
(21) Recommending guardian and recommending institutional and individual guardian,
(22) Certifying kinship with the living,
(23) Certifying the right holder, heir
(24) Recommending transfer of ownership,
(25) Recommending the right to land,
(26) Recommending kinship with the dead,
(27) Recommending the transfer of location of industry,
(28) Recommending that a person is alive,
(29) Recommending and granting permission to run pre-primary school,
(30) Certifying the land value recommendation,
(31) Recommending addition of grades in school,
(32) Recommending for caretaker,
(33) Recommending naturalized citizenship by marriage,
(34) Recommending poor economic condition or backwardness or strong economic condition
or prosperity,
(35) Recommending transfer of location of school,
(36) Recommending for installation of water tap and power,
(37) Other recommendation or certification as per the delegated rights as per the prevalent
(3) The Ward Committee shall exercise the function, duties and rights as per Sub-clause (2),
until the function, duties and rights of the Ward Committee is prescribed by the executive as
per Sub-clause (1).
(4) The work to be carried out from the Ward shall be done in the name of the ward office.
13. Determination of minimum rate: (1) The rural municipality or municipality should
determine the local minimum rate of goods, wage, transportation cost, tariff etc for the
purpose of construction and other services related to works as per Sub-clause (1) and (2)
within its jurisdiction.
(2) Determination of the wage rate as per Sub-clause (1) should be done in a way not to be
lower than the national minimum wage determined by the Government of Nepal.
(3) The rates as per Sub-clause (1) should be determined fifteen days prior to the beginning of
every fiscal year.
14. Committee, Sub-committee or task force to be formed: (1) The executive may
constitute committee, sub-committee under the convenorship of any member in order to
manage its function and actions.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality may constitute a task force under the
convenorship of any member or subject expert in the area where it requires thematic
expertise.
(3) The scope, term and other matters of the committee, sub-committee or task force to be
formed as per Sub-clause (1) or (2) shall be as prescribed during the formation of such
committee, sub-committee or task force.
(4) The function, duties and rights of the office-bearers shall be as follows until the work
division or function, duties and rights is determined by the regulation as per Sub-clause (1):
a. Function, duties and rights of Chair or Mayor: The function, duties and rights of the Chair
or Mayor shall be as follows:
(1) Summon the meeting of the assembly and executive and chair the meeting,
(2) Table, cause to table the agenda of the meeting and proposals in the meeting of the
assembly and executive.
(3) Prepare and cause to present the annual programme and budget,
(4) Summon and prorogue the session of the assembly,
(5) Enforce, cause to enforce the decision of the assembly and executive,
(6) General observation, direction and control of the daily functioning of the executive,
(7) To depute Vice-chair or Deputy-mayor, executive member and Chief Administrative
Officer,
(8) To carry out certification or recommendation to be carried out from the local level as per
the prevalent Nepal law, except those recommendation and certification to be executed by the
ward committee as per Section e. of Clause 12,
(9) To take care, cause to take care of the movable and immovable asset, cause to carry out its
maintenance, and keep safely, cause to keep safely the income, expenditure, accounts and
other documents of the rural municipality and municipality,
(10) To oversee the works of the committee, sub-committee of the rural municipality and
municipality, and of the ward committee,
(11) To manage, cause to manage the grievances related to public service delivery,
(12) In case of absence from the rural municipality or municipality for more than seven days,
handover portfolio to Vice-chair or Deputy-mayor and to any member if the Vice-chair or
Deputy-mayor is also absent,
(13) Other tasks assigned by the assembly or executive.
b. Function, duties and rights of Vice-chair or Deputy-mayor: The function, duties and rights
of the Vice-chair or Deputy-mayor shall be as follows:
(1) To serve as the Coordinator of the Judicial Committee,
(2) To assume portfolio in absence of Chair or Mayor,
(3) Coordinate the activities of the non-government organisations,
(4) Coordinate works relating to protection of consumer interests,
(5) Carry out monitoring and supervision of the plan and programmes, and present a report of
its to the meeting,
(6) Facilitate and coordinate the works of the committees constituted by the assembly and
executive,
(7) Inform Chair or Mayor in case of absence in rural municipality or municipality for more
than seven days,
(8) Carry out other tasks delegated or prescribed by the assembly, executive, Chair or Mayor.
c. Function, duties and rights of the Ward Chair: The function, duties and rights of the Ward
Chair is as follows:
(1) To act as the Chair of the ward committee,
(2) To coordinate and facilitate the works of the ward committee members,
(3) To prepare, cause to prepare the development plan, budget and programme of the ward,
and submit it for approval of the rural municipality or municipality,
(4) To implement, cause to implement the plan and programmes to be implemented by the
ward, carry out, cause to carry out its monitoring and periodic assessment,
(5) To carry out works related to recommendation and certification as mentioned in section e.
of Clause 12,
(6) In case of absence in the ward for more than seven days, assign responsibilities relating to
daily administrative and recommendation work of the ward to any member of the concerned
ward, and inform the Chair or Mayor about the same,
(7) To carry out other tasks prescribed by the executive, assembly or ward committee,
d. Function, duties and rights of members of the executive: The function, duties and rights of
the executive is as follows:
(1) To attend the meeting of the executive,
(2) To carry out the specified task as Coordinator or Chief of the thematic area assigned by the
Chair or Mayor,
(3) Inform the Chair or Mayor in case of absence for more than seven days in the rural
municipality or municipality,
(4) To carry out other tasks assigned by the executive.
15. To mobilize and coordinate: The rural municipality and municipality may, while carrying
out development works and service delivery related work at the local level, encourage the
mobilization and promotion of users, private sector, community organisations, cooperatives
and non-government sector within its area.
16. Work division and work execution: (1) The provisions related to work division and work
execution of the executive shall be as per the regulations endorsed by the concerned
executive.
(2) The work division regulations as per Sub-clause (1) should also mention the function,
duties and rights of the chairperson and mayor, vice-chair and deputy mayor, ward chair and
members.
(3) The work division and work execution regulations as per Sub-clause (1) should be sent to
the province and the Government of Nepal within 15 days of the date of endorsement or
amendment.
17. Meeting and decision: (1) The meeting of the executive shall be held for at least once in a
month.
(2) Presence of more than fifty per cent members of the immediate existing number of
members in the executive shall be regarded to have fulfilled the quorum for the meeting.
(3) The decision of the executive shall be taken unanimously.
(4) In case of a failure to reach a unanimous decision as per Sub-clause (3), the decision taken
by a majority of the number of members immediately existing in the executive shall be the
decision of the executive.
(5) Other provisions relating to meeting and decision of the executive shall be as per the
regulations pursuant to Article 218 of the Constitution.
18. Power delegation: (1) The executive may delegate some of its powers to Chair or Mayor,
Vice-Chair or deputy Mayor, ward committee member, its subordinate committee, subcommittee or executive officer or other officer-level employees.
(2) The rural municipality chair or vice chair, mayor or deputy mayor of municipality may
delegate some of their powers received as per the law to any member or employee.
(3) The ward committee or ward chair may delegate some of its power received as per the law
to any member or employee of the ward committee.

Chapter-4
Assembly meeting and working system
19. Assembly meeting: (1) The meeting of the assembly shall be generally held twice in a year,
(2) The meeting of the assembly shall be called by the Chair or Mayor,
(3) If one-third of the members of the Assembly make a written request before the Chair or
Mayor stating that it is necessary to call a meeting, then the Chair or Mayor should call a
special meeting within twenty-five days,
(4) The notice of the date, time and location of the meeting should be given to all the
members of the Assembly by the executive officer as per the directives of the Chair or Mayor
at least seven days before the meeting,
(5) Presence of one-fourth members of the total members of the assembly shall be regarded to
have fulfilled the quorum required for the meeting,
(6) The meeting of the assembly shall be chaired by the Chair or Mayor and in his/her absence
by the Vice-chair or deputy Mayor,
(7) A majority decision would be recognized in the meeting of the Assembly and in case of a
tie of votes, the person chairing the meeting shall given the decisive vote.
(8) The decision of the meeting of the assembly shall be certified by the person chairing the
meeting,
(9) The Chief Administrative Officer shall serve as the secretary of the assembly,
(10) Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Assembly shall be as determined by the
Assembly.
(11) The provisions in this Clause shall remain in force only until other arrangement is made in
relation to the meeting of the assembly by the provincial law.

Chapter-5
Procedures relating to management of the Assembly
20. Procedures to table bill in the assembly: (1) The Executive may present a bill before the
assembly on matters under the jurisdiction of the rural municipality and municipality.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this Clause bill means the draft of the Act tabled before
the assembly.
(2) For the matter related to the management of the assembly shall the procedures as per this
Chapter shall be adopted until other provisions on the matter are made in the provincial law.
21. Method to pass and certify a bill: (1) If the bill presented as per Clause 19 (1) to the
assembly is passed by a majority of the then existing number of members of the assembly then
the Assembly chair shall certify the bill within fifteen days.
(2) The bill certified as per Sub-clause (1) will become an Act.
22. Formation of Committee: The Assembly may form accounts committee, legislation
committee, good-governance committee and other committee and special committee
as required by developing regulations to manage its working system.
23. To be held as per the work operation regulations: Other matters relating to the
working procedures of the management of the assembly shall be as per the work operation
regulations (rules of procedure) drafted by the assembly.

Chapter-6
Formulation and implementation of plan
24. Develop and implement plan: (1) The rural municipality and municipality may develop
and implement periodic, annual, strategic and thematic mid-term and long-plan development
plan for the development of the local level under its jurisdiction.
(2) While developing plans as per Sub-clause (1), areas inter-related to good governance,
environment friendly and child friendly governance, climate change adaptation, disaster
management and gender and social inclusion should be considered in pursuance to the policy,
target, goal, time limitation and process of the government of Nepal and provincial
government.
(3) While developing the plan, the rural municipality and municipality may do so by giving
priority to following matters:
(a) That directly contributes to economic development and poverty alleviation,
(b) That could bring production-oriented and quick outcomes,
(c) That uplifts the living standard, income and employment,
(d) That ensure maximum participation of the local people, could mobilize volunteers and
cost less,
(e) That leads to maximum use of local resources and skills,
(f) That directly benefits the backward class, region and community,
(g) That enhances gender equality and social inclusion,
(h) That supports protection and promotion of sustainable development and environment
preservation and promotion,
(g) That preserves lingual, cultural aspect, and supports enhancement of social harmony and
solidarity.
(4). Based on the Sub-clause (1), the rural municipality and municipality must prepare an
inventory of the projects of mid-term and long-term nature.
(5) While developing and implementing its plan, the local level must ensure maximum
participation of the local intellectuals and subject matter experts, experienced and retired
professionals as well as of the local residents including the marginalised and near-extinct
community, women, children, dalit, youth, minorities, people with disabilities, elderly citizens
living within its area.
(6) While developing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating its plans, the rural
municipality and municipality must do so after also preparing the prior estimation of
resources, prioritization of project, selection of projects based on feasibility study, plan
implementation time table and monitoring and evaluation plan.
(7) In case the Government of Nepal and provincial government have set any procedures after
providing any grant for a special programme, then the rural municipality and municipality
must carry out the project and programme management following the same process.
(8) The rural municipality and municipality may operate and manage any plan or project in
joint investment of the Government of Nepal or provincial government or in public-private
partnership.
(9) The rural municipality and municipality shall coordinate, facilitate and support the
implementation of federal and provincial level projects.
(10) The rural municipality and municipality may carry out the act of necessary study, research
and impact assessment of the local level development projects.
25. To work in coordination: (1) The non-government organisation, users’ committee,
cooperatives institution and other social and community organisations must work in
coordination with the local level.
Provided that any international non-government organisation should have taken prior
approval of the Government of Nepal for the work to be carried out with the local level.
(2) Coordination with the local level as per Sub-clause (1) should be carried out as follows:
(a) To carry out any kind of study, survey or programme only on the basis of an agreement
with the local level,
(b) To include its annual plan, programme and budget in the local level’s annual plan,
programme and budget,
(c) To adopt the joint monitoring and progress reporting system as designated by the local
level.
(3) If any organisation works in violation of this Clause, the local level may halt the
implementation of such activities.
(4) Other provisions related to coordination shall be as per the prevalent law.
26. Working/operating with partnership and joint management: In the course of
carrying out its work, the rural municipality or municipality may, for the purpose of cost
minimization, maximum utilization of resources and effective service delivery, act on the
following areas in partnership or joint management of resources following a mutual
agreement with another rural municipality or municipality:
(a) Large infrastructure development, procurement and management of large machine and
tools,
(b) Disaster Management,
(c) Transport operation and management,
(d) Development and operation of waste collection site or processing system,
(e) Operation of fire tender vehicle and ambulance service,
(f) Settlement development and land use plan
(g) Promotion and development of tourism, technology and culture
(h) Joint business
(i) Operation, Promotion and development of basic and secondary level technical education
(j) Local market management and environment protection,
(k) Inter-local level sister relations,
(l) Exchange of best practice and experience,
(m) Material and financial support,
(o) Other appropriate matters.

Chapter 7
Provision related to building construction and roads
27. Building not to be constructed without approving the design: (1) Nobody shall
construct buildings without having the design approved from the rural municipality or
municipality.
Provided that it shall not obstruct constructing buildings in the case of areas and structures
prescribed by the rural municipality or municipality.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this Clause, “building construction” means constructing a
new building, reconstructing after dismantling an old building, adding floors, changing the
façade or making changes to the existing by adding or removing window, door, verandah, roof,
or making a garage or putting a boundary wall, and the term shall also denote the building
made for joint residence.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality should prescribe the standards relating to land use
on the basis of the land-risk sensibility and may approve building construction only in the
specified areas on the basis of such standards.
(3) Plotting of land cannot be made for buildings without prior permission of the rural
municipality or municipality.
(4) The rural municipality or municipality may order reconstruction, retrofitting, or
dismantling of buildings vulnerable in terms of earthquake or disaster after classifying the
building in its area.
(5) The rural municipality or municipality may designate the standard of building
construction by specifying the height, set back, roof, façade, type of construction materials,
colour or artisan of any historical, touristic or archaeologically important settlement or
building to be constructed in the area, without contradicting with the prevalent law and the
standards set by the Government of Nepal.
(6) The rural municipality and municipality may designate all its area or any specific area and
prepare similar format of design of the land for the buildings to be constructed in such areas
based on the nature, size and area of the building and for the service-recipients may develop
for free the design by its own technical staff.
28. Application to be filed for permission: (1) An individual or government office wishing
to construction a building in the rural municipality or municipality area should file an
application before the rural municipality or municipality for building construction permit
along with the design of the building in the format as specified by the rural municipality or
municipality.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this chapter, “government office” shall mean the Office of
the President and Vice-president, Supreme Court, Federal Parliament, Provincial Assembly,
Constitutional Bodies, Nepali Army, Armed Police Force, Nepal Police, Provincial Police, and
all government offices and courts.
(2) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-Clause (1), if it is not possible for any
government agency while filing the application for building construction permit to submit the
design of the building from the national security perspective then only the length, breadth,
height and floors, and the total area of coverage may be mentioned.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this chapter “design” means the drawings, details and
other documents related to building construction.
29. To be clarified in design: In addition to other matters, the design for a new building
construction should clearly show a separate toilet and soak pit, and in case the building is to
be constructed by attaching it to another building then the building should have it separate
kilas किलास displayed in the design.
30. Written evidence or consent of right to possession to be presented: Application filed
for building construction permit as per Clause 28 should also include an evidence of right to
possession if the building is to be constructed in a land that one’s has right to possession and
if it is to be constructed in a land with other’s right to possession over it then evidence of the
person’s right to possession along with consent in writing.
Provided that the land of others cannot be taken on lease or rent to fulfil the required
standards for the purpose of having the design approved.
31. To be examined: The Chief Administrative Officer shall, within seven days of filing of the
application for building construction as per Clause 28, examine whether the application fulfil
the required criteria and if not will have it fulfilled and act as follows on the applications filed
fulfilling the required criteria:
(a) To paste notice in his/her office, doorstep of the neighbour and in the place where the
building is to be constructed appealing to the immediate neighbours to come to report with a
complaint within fifteen days if the building construction causes any difficulty to him/her
along with the details of the difficulty to be faced as a result,
(b) To mobilize the engineer or sub-engineer including other staff jointly to examine, within
three days of the expiry of the limitation as mentioned in the notice as per Section (a),
whether construction of building as mentioned in the application is allowed.
32. Report to be presented: The staffers to be mobilized as per section (b) of Clause 31 will
carry out a recognisance to examine whether the building can be constructed as per the
human settlement development, urban planning and building construction standards set by
the Government of Nepal, and prepare affidavit also including the statements of those present
in the recognisance, and present a report including details of whether building construction as
mentioned in the application is allowed to the rural municipality or municipality within
fifteen days of having mobilize for such examination.
33. Permit to be issued: (1) In case of a complaint not received as per section (a) of Clause 31,
the Chief Administrative Officer should issue the permit within seven days of receiving the
report as per Clause 32.
(2) In case of a complaint received from anyone as per section (a) of Clause 31, except in
situation where a decision has to be given on the right to use, the chief administrative officer
should issue the permit for building construction within thirty days of receiving the report as
per Clause 32.
(3) In case of a complaint filed as per section (a) of Clause 31 leading to a situation whether a
decision has to be made on the right to use over the land where the building is to be
constructed, the concerned sides needs to be communicated to file complaint before the
concerned district court within thirty-five days of receiving such complaint.
Provided that if only some part of such land is under dispute and if application is filed along
with a different design agreeing to construct the building in the remaining land and agree to
court’s verdict over the disputed land, the chief administrative officer may issue the permit
within fifteen days of received such application.
(4) The fee for the permit to be issued for building construction as per this Clause shall be as
determined by the rural municipality or municipality.
34. To approve the design: (1) The chief administrative officer should also endorse the design
of the building while issuing the permit to construct any building.
(2) While approving the design of any building as per Sub-clause (1), the chief administrative
officer may approve it with necessary changes in pursuance to the standards set by the
physical development plan and the prevalent law.
35. To make changes in the design: If any changes are to be made in the design approved as
per Clause 34, the chief administrative officer may endorse changes in the design that does not
affect the standards set as per the prevalent law in areas other than adding floors, changing
the faced or length and increase the breadth.
Provided that if an amended design is presented in pursuance to the set standards to add
floors, change the façade or length and increase breadth, then the permit can be issued after
charging the additional fee prescribed by the rural municipality or municipality.
36: To be informed: Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in this chapter, if the building
permit cannot be issued as per the report received pursuant to Clause 32 or for other reasons,
the Chief Administrative Officer shall inform the individual or government agency filing
application as per Clause 28 along with reasons for it within seven days of receiving such
report.
37. Complaint to be filed: (1) The individual or agency filing the application for building
construction permit as per Clause 28 may file a complaint with the Chair or Mayor within
thirty-five days of not having received the permit within the limitation as per Clause 33 and
within thirty-five days of being informed as per Clause 36, if not satisfied with the report.
(2) In case of a report received as per Sub-clause (1), the Chair or Mayor shall carry out an
inquiry into it and if found to be issued the building construction permit the Chief
Administrative Officer shall be directed to immediately issue the permit.
38. Period for building construction: (1) The individual or government office receiving the
building construction permit should construct the building within two years from the date of
having received the permit accordingly.
(2) If the building is not constructed within the limitation as per Sub-clause (1), then an
application must be filed before the Chief Administrative Officer for extension of the
limitation before such limitation expires, along with reasons for the same.
(3) In case of an application received as per Sub-clause (2), the Chief Administrative Officer
may extend the limitation for two years after charging five per cent of the fee charged in the
first instance.
39. Inquiry and action: (1) The Chief Administrative Officer may depute any engineer, subengineer or employee to examine the following matters in relation to the building constructed
or being constructed by anyone in the rural municipality or municipality area:
(a) Whether permit has been acquired as per the approved standards from the Government of
Nepal to construct the building,
(b) Whether the building is being constructed as per the design permitted pursuant to the
approved standards of the Government of Nepal, and
(c) Whether the building has encroached upon public land, road, canal, temple, chowk,
sewage, drain, pond etc.
(2) The individual constructing the building and all those related with the building
construction work should respond to the queries of those coming to inquire as per Sub-clause
(1) and provide or show the documents sought and provide necessary support.
(3) The employee deputed for examination as per Sub-clause (1) shall carry out necessary
examination of such building construction and present his/her report along with
recommendations to the Chief Administrative Officer within fifteen days from the date of
being deputed accordingly. The Chief Administrative Officer shall present such report to the
Chair or Mayor within seven days.
(4) If anyone is found to have constructed or constructing building against Sub-clause (1) as
per the report submitted pursuant to Sub-clause (2), the Chair or Mayor shall issue an order to
bring down the building or any part of it.
(5) As per the report submitted pursuant to Sub-clause (2), if anyone is found to have
constructed or constructing building without having the design approved or by making
changes without approval in the endorsed design then the Chair or Mayor shall fine the
individual five hundred thousand rupees for constructing building without approving the
design and two hundred thousand rupees for constructing by making changes in the design
without approval, and issue an order to bring down such building or some part of it.
(6) Prior to issuing an order as per Sub-clause (4) or (5), the Chair or Mayor should give
appropriate opportunity for the individual constructing such building to present his/her
clarification.
40. Appeal: The individual not satisfied with the order issued by the Chair or Mayor as per
Sub-clause (4) or (5) of Clause 39 may register an appeal at the District Court within thirty-five
days of receiving the information of such order and the decision of the District Court in
relation to such appeal shall be the final verdict.
41. To recover the expenses incurred in dismantling building, structures: (1) In case of
an order is issued to dismantle any building, structure or part of it as per Sub-clause (4) or (5)
of Clause 39, if an appeal is filed against such order as per Clause 40 then within thirty-five
days of the date of the decision to dismantle the building or any of its part being endorsed by
the District Court and within thirty-five days of the expiry of the date for appeal, the
concerned individual shall dismantle such building, structure or any part of it as per the order
of the Chair or Mayor or the district court.
(2) If the concerned individual does not dismantle such building, structure or any part of it
within the limitation as per Sub-clause (1), then the rural municipality or municipality shall
dismantle such building, structure or any part of it, and expenses incurred while dismantling
it accordingly shall be recovered from the concerned individual.
42. Special provision related to approval of design: (1) Notwithstanding whatsoever is
written in this Chapter, in case of the building constructed prior to the commencement of this
Act without approving the design as per the then prevailing law or by making changes without
approval in the approved design, if the standards and code related to building construction
has been followed then the municipality shall for one time since the commencement of this
Act grant approval to have the design endorsed or make changes in the approved design by
making the following provisions:
(a) Publish a public notice for filing of application along with evidence with a limitation of
thirty-five days to the concerned individual,
(b) In case of an application is received within the limitation mentioned in Section (a),
carry out an onsite technical examination, inquire with the immediate neighbours and
verify whether the standards and code related to building construction has been
followed,
(c) In case it is verified that the standards and code related to building construction has
been fulfilled, then charge three times of the current fee applicable for approving the
design or making changes to the approved design.
(2) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (1), the provision shall not apply in
case of apartment, housing, hotel and other commercial buildings.
43. To enforce, cause to enforce the national building code: (1) The rural municipality and
the municipality shall enforce, cause to enforce the national building code determined by the
Government of Nepal while approving the design of the building as per Clause 26.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality may enforce additional standards by acting within
the national building code.
44. To adopt national standard and provincial standard: (1) The rural municipality and
the municipality should adopt the national and provincial standards set by the Government of
Nepal and the provincial government in the construction, operation or management of roads,
physical infrastructure, integrated settlement development and urban plan, land use plan,
consumable service, social service and infrastructure.
(2) The rural municipality and the municipality may enforce additional standards without
compromising on the national and provincial standards as per Sub-clause (1).
45. To determine the jurisdiction of roads: (1) The rural municipality or municipality can
designate the right of way in the local roads under its jurisdiction.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality should enforce the standards of the right of way of
national, provincial level roads.
(3) The rural municipality or municipality can cause to remove or dismantle at any time the
structures built within the right of way as per Sub-clause (1) or (2).
(4) If the structures are not removed or dismantled as per the order of Sub-clause (3), the rural
municipality or municipality can remove and dismantle it by itself. The cost incurred in
removing or dismantling thereof shall be recovered from the concerned individual, institution
or body.
(5) After the commencement of this Act, if the right of way prescribed for once as per Subclause (1) has to be changed and that includes the land or the structures building on that land
belonging to anyone under the changed right of way, then compensation should be provided
while acquiring the land or removing or dismantling the structures built on the land.

Chapter-8
Provision related to the judicial work
46. Judicial Committee: (1) There shall remain a judicial committee in every rural
municipality and municipality as per Article 217 of the Constitution.
47. Jurisdiction of the judicial committee: The judicial committee shall have the right to
settle the following cases:
(a) Border/boundary of land, dams, ditches or distribution and use of water,
(b) Damage to other crops,
(c) Pasture land, green fodder, fuel wood,
(d) Unpaid wages,
(e) Lost or found of domestic animals and birds,
(f) Not caring and looking after elderly citizens,
(g) Not providing decent food and clothing or education to minor children or husband-wife,
(h) House rent and house rent facility with amount up to twenty-five hundred thousand
annually,
(i) Planting of trees to affect other’s house, land or property,
(j) Throwing water from one’s house or verandah to others house, land or public road,
(k) Not leaving the area of land to be left as per the law while constructing a house with a
window towards the land of the immediate neighbour,
(l) Not allowing to use or causing obstruction to a road being used publicly since ancient times
even though it is under the right or ownership of any individual, way out for cattle, pasture for
grazing cattle, drain, canal, pond, rest place, cremation site, religious site or any other public
location,
(m) Other disputes designated by the federal or provincial law to be resolved by the local level.
(2) The Judicial Committee shall have the right to settle disputes through mediation in only
the following disputes:
(a) A land other than government, public or community land owned by one is encroached by
other,
(b) Construction of house or any structure in a land other than government, public or
community land, noting belonging to the person but of others,
(c) Divorce between wife and husband,
(d) Physical assault that could be liable to a maximum of one years of imprisonment, other
than those leading to dismemberment,
(e) Defamation,
(f) Looting and assault
(g) Leaving cattle stray or affecting others due to negligence in course of keeping animals and
birds,
(h) Unauthorized entry to other’s residence,
(i) Cultivating or possessing land that is in other’s possession,
(j) Affecting neighbour with sound pollution or throwing solid waste,
(k) Other civil disputes filed by an individual as claimant which could be mediated as per
prevalent law and criminal disputes that could lead to up to one year’s imprisonment.
(3) In case of the disputes relating to Sub-clause (2), it shall not be regarded to have
obstructed to file a case directly at the court if the concerned party wishes.
(4) In the disputes mentioned in this Clause petition must be filed before the Judicial
Committee within the limitation if any such limitation is prescribed to file petition before the
case hearing authority in the prevalent law and within thirty-five days of such act having
committed in case where no limitation has been prescribed.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this Chapter petition has also mean complaint or law suit.
48. Exercise of Jurisdiction: (1) The judicial committee coordinator and members shall
collectively exercise the jurisdiction of the judicial committee and the opinion of majority
shall be deemed as the decision of the judicial committee.
(2) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (1), the dispute can be prosecuted
and settled with the presence of the judicial committee coordinator and one another member.
(3) While prosecuting, and settling as per Sub-clause (2), with the presence of two members,
except the Judicial committee coordinator, other action can be taken except to decide on and
give final verdict on the dispute.
(4) If the post of the coordinator falls vacant for any reason, then the dispute can be
prosecuted and settled with the unanimous decision of the remaining two members.
(5) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Clause, if the judicial committee
coordinator or any member carries personal concern or interest in any of the dispute or if any
person related to the coordinator or member is a party to the dispute, then the person cannot
prosecute and settle the case.
(6) In case of the dispute that cannot be overseen by the coordinator or any member as per
Sub-clause (5), the members other than such coordinator or member can prosecute and settle
the dispute. If the Coordinator and all the members cannot prosecute and settle the case, then
the concerned assembly should designate three members just to prosecute and settle that
particular case.
(7) While prosecuting and settling the dispute as per Sub-clause (6), the senior most member
among the three members shall serve as the Judicial Committee coordinator.
49. Justice execution process: (1) The Judicial Committee shall send the evidence of the
petition of dispute registered before it to the concerned party after having it registered.
(2) While prosecuting and settling the dispute registered before it, the judicial committee shall
as far as possible encourage reconciliation and reconcile with the consensus of both parties. If
the parties do not reconcile, then the judicial committee should prosecute and settle the case
as per the law in the dispute as mentioned in Sub-clause (1) of Clause 47.
(3) The Judicial Committee shall, while carrying out reconciliation as per Sub-clause (2), do so
through the mediators enlisted by the Committee.
(4) In the dispute mentioned in Sub-clause (2) of Clause 47, the Judicial Committee should
settle the case through mediation within three months from the date of arrival of the
defendant. If reconciliation is not possible within the period, the concerned party should be
communicated to go to the court by mentioning the same details and the documents and
evidence related to it should also be sent to the concerned court.
(5) If the party as per Sub-clause (4) presents himself/herself, then the concerned Court shall
prosecute and settle the case as per the prevalent law.
(6) In the dispute registered before the Judicial Committee, if the claimant has filed a petition
to withhold the accounts, deposit in the name of the defendant in any bank, company,
financial institution or other agency or to keep on hold the amount that the claimant is
entitled to and not pay to anyone else or to stop the transfer of the ownership of any
immovable property in the possession of the defendant, then the Judicial Committee if it finds
appropriate to do so following an inquiry write to the concerned agency to withhold it by
specifying a period for it, and communication received as such should be followed to withhold
accordingly and the judicial committee informed about it.
(7) If the defendant files as application before the Judicial Committee to lift the act of
withholding as per Sub-clause (6), the committee may write to the concerned agency to
release it if it found to be appropriate to do so as per the application and communication
received as such should be followed to release it and the judicial committee informed about it.
(8) While exercising the jurisdiction as per Clause 47, the Judicial Committee may also issue
an interim protection order to the concerned party in the dispute related to the husband and
wife or of protection of elderly citizens for the interest of their minor child or any other person
dependent on the person:
(a) To allow the victim to live in the house he/she has being staying, provide food and
clothing, to not physically assault and to behave in a decent and civilized manner,
(b) To carry out treatment if the victim has suffered physical or mental injury,
(c) To make arrangement for separate accommodation if it is deemed necessary for the victim
and to make proper arrangement of subsistence in such separate accommodation,
(d) To not slur, threaten or behave in an uncivilized way with the victim,
(e) To carry out other necessary and appropriate matters for the interest and security of the
victim.
(9) If any application is filed before the Judicial Committee in relation to any dispute as per
Clause 47, then the defendant himself/herself or his/her representative should be present
before the Judicial Committee along with written details within the limitation if a limitation is
specified for the defendant to be present before the case hearing authority in the prevalent law
and if not specified then within fifteen days, besides the travel time.
(10) The Judicial Committee may constitute mediation centres in every ward for the purpose of
forging reconciliation in the disputes as per Clause 47.
(11) In case of more than one mediation centres in one ward, the judicial committee may send
the disputing parties to the mediation centre they have chosen or in case of failure of
consensus on the parties on the matter then to any mediation centre of the ward for resolving
dispute through mediation.
(12) While prosecuting and settling the petition of dispute registered before it, the judicial
committee shall carry out the process of registration of the petition, necessary inquiry
and prosecution of the dispute, process to make the sides present, bail, time to execute
the case, the procedures relating to mediation, and other procedures of dispute
resolution as per the local law.
50. Written information to be provided: The final decision of the dispute by the judicial
committee should be provided to the concerned sides within thirty-five days of the decision
made, including a certified copy of the decision.
51. Right to appeal: Any party not satisfied with the decision of the judicial committee may
appeal to the concerned District Court within ninety days of the date of the decision.
52. Enforcement of mediation or decisions: (1) The Executive shall at once execute or cause
to execute the mediation or decision by the judicial committee.
(2) Other provisions related to the enforcement of the mediation or decision by the judicial
committee shall be as per the local law.
53. Records to be maintained: (1) The documents related to the dispute where the mediation
or decision took place and the records of the mediation or decision by the judicial committee
should be kept in an orderly and safe manner by the rural municipality and municipality.
(2) The judicial committee shall submit through the chair or mayor an annual report of its
work to the concerned assembly.

Chapter-9
Fiscal jurisdiction of the rural municipality and municipality
54. Not to impose tax, raise or acquire loan except as per the law: The rural municipality
and municipality shall not impose, collect any tax and raise loan in its jurisdiction, except as
per the law.
55. Property tax and house and land tax: (1) The rural municipality and municipality shall
impose an integrated property tax or house and land tax within its jurisdiction.
Provided that integrated property tax would be imposed from 1st of Shrawan 2075 B.S.
EXPLANATION: For the purpose of this Clause, the integrated property tax means the
property tax impose in an integrated manner by calculating the house and land under the
ownership of a single person within the area of any rural municipality or municipality.
(2) The following issues needs to be taken into consideration while imposing tax as per Subclause (1),
(a) Size, type, composition and use of the house land and status of the productive utility of
immovable property,
(b) Living standard, financial status and spending capacity of the citizen,
(c) The prevalent market price and depreciating value of the immovable property,
(d) Other basis deemed appropriate by the assembly.
56. Land tax (land revenue): The rural municipality and municipality shall impose land tax
on land in its jurisdiction depending on the utility of the land.
Provided that land tax shall not be enforced in case integrated property tax has been levied.
57. House rent tax: The rural municipality and municipality shall impose house rent tax
within its jurisdiction if any individual or institution has rented out in full or partial the house,
shop, garage, godown, tent, shed, factory, land or pond etc in the rural municipality and
municipality.
58. Business tax: The rural municipality and municipality shall impose business tax on the
basis of capital investment and financial transaction on any trade, business or profession
within its area.
59. Rent or tenancy tax: The rural municipality and municipality shall impose rent or
tenancy tax on the weekly bazaar, market, shops constructed, overseen or operated by itself
within its area.
60. Parking fee: The rural municipality and municipality may impose parking fee for the
parking service provided to any vehicle within its area.
61. Herbs, scrap and wildlife tax: The rural municipality and municipality shall impose
herbs and wildlife tax on wool, herbs, hay grass, scrap goods and for the commercial use of the
bones, horn, feather, skin etc of the dead or killed wildlife other than the wildlife prohibited
by the prevalent law.
62. Service fee: (1) The rural municipality and municipality may levy and collect fee in cable
car, trekking, kayaking, canoeing, bungee jump, zip flyer, rafting, paragliding and other local
tourism, entertainment and adventure sports related service or business operated in its area.
Provided that while imposing fee on the service or business to be operated in the river
bordering with another rural municipality or municipality or to be carried out by including
more than one rural municipality or municipality it shall be carried out in coordination with
the concerned village municipality and municipality.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality may impose, collect and manage the service fee
from the concerned service provider or the user of any service or infrastructure that it has
constructed, operated or managed as follows:
(a) Drinking water, power, tap, guest house, dharmashala, library, meeting hall, public
telephone and other similar services,
(b) Services like solid waste management, sanitation, sewage, street lamps etc,
(c) Toilet, park, bathroom, swimming pool, gym, guest house, tourist sport, hostel, weekly
market, animal butchery house, crematorium, dhobighat (washer man) and other similar
facilities.,
(d) Services like road, bus park, sewage, bridge, footpath, chowk, lane, canal, light etc,
(e) For service of evaluating the immovable property or any other thing,
(f) Any service relating to recommendation.
(2) The providing of facilities as mentioned in Sub-clause (1) and the raising of service fee for it
may be carried out by the rural municipality and municipality itself or through a management
contract or through the private sector.
(3) The rural municipality or municipality may raise the service fee for the services to be
provided or for the use of such services as mentioned in Sub-clause (1) and (2) by itself or raise
it through management contract or through the private sector.
63. Not to impose tax, fee or tariff: (1) The rural municipality and municipality shall not
impose tax on matters that are tax exempted as per the law to diplomatic mission or
diplomats.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality shall not impose any kind of tax, fee or tariff on
goods imported from outside the country by the Government of Nepal, provincial
government, university, government hospitals, government-owned foundation or
development committee for projects run with foreign loan or grant.
(3) Integrated property tax shall not apply on the stock of the houses remaining after being
sold under the collective residence or joint residence within the period designated by the rural
municipality or municipality.
Provided that if the unsold stock is utilized in any way, then tax would apply on the stock.
(4) Integrated property tax shall not be imposed on the basement, garden, parking area that is
used not only by an individual or a family but collectively as part of a joint housing or
collective housing built with approval from the Government of Nepal, provincial government
or rural municipality and municipality.
64. Determination of tax, collection and sharing within the dual jurisdiction of the
province and rural municipality and municipality: (1) The determination and collection of
the following taxes under the jurisdiction of province and rural municipality and municipality
shall be as follows:
(a) The province to determine and collect the vehicle tax,
Provided that the rural municipality and municipality shall determine and collect the vehicle
tax of horse cart, rickshaw, auto rickshaw and e-rickshaw and deposit it in its fund.
(b) The rate of house and land registration shall be determined by the province and its
collection by the rural municipality and municipality,
(c) The determination and collection of the rate of advertisement tax shall be carried out by
the rural municipality or municipality,
(d) The province to determine the rate and way of collection of entertainment tax and its
collection to be carried out by the concerned rural municipality or municipality,
(e) Determination of the rate of tourism fee and its collection shall be as follows:
(i) The province to determine and collect trekking and tourism tariff,
(ii) The province to determine and collect the trekking and tourism fee,
(f) The province to determine the rate of natural resources including stones, pebbles, slate,
sand, limestone, magnesite, Abhrakha and Dahattar Bahattar, and the collection by the
concerned rural municipality or municipality.
(2) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (1), the mountaineering fee and entry
fee to national park and wildlife reserve would be determined and collected as provided by the
Government of Nepal.
(3) The revenue to be collected as per this Clause by the province and rural municipality and
municipality shall be deposited under separate source-wise heading by setting up a fund at the
provincial level.
(4) The following bases needs to be considered while sharing every heading-wise amount
deposited as per Sub-clause (2) in a balanced and transparent manner:
(a) Basis of origin of revenue,
(b) Revenue collection cost,
(c) The service provided to the people by the province and rural municipality and
municipality,
(d) Poverty, local regional imbalance and inequality minimization,
(e) Other basis of income
65. Local Revenue Advisory Committee: There shall remain a local revenue advisory
committee in the rural municipality or municipality as follows for consultation relating
to revenue:
(a) Vice-chair or Deputy-mayor
-Coordinator
(b) Chief Administrative Officer
-Member
(c) Two members including one woman from among
the members of the executive designated by the executive
-Member
(d) Village or town level chair of a recognized institution related to
industry and commerce of the private sector or his/her representative – Member
(e) Village or town level chair of a recognized institution related to
Cottage and small industry or his/her representative
(f) Chief of the revenue division, department or branch of the executive
-Member-secretary
(2) The function, duties and rights of the Revenue Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
(a) Formulation, reform and amendment of revenue related policy and law, and provide
necessary consultation in relation to its adherence,
(b) Analyse the revenue sources, circle and rate and make revenue estimates for the coming
fiscal year,
(c) Make internal income analysis and estimates based on rate and area of revenue,
(d) Provide consultation on the type of tax policy that contribute to promotion of local
industry and business and to generating employment,
(e) Provide consultation in relation to the rate of tax revenue, non-tax revenue, service
tariff, fee etc.
(f) Provide other required consultation for revenue administration reforms.
(3) The committee as per Sub-clause (1) may invite as required concerned sector experts and
other stakeholders to the committee meeting.
(4) The procedures relating to the meeting of the committee as per Sub-clause (1) shall be as
determined by the committee.
66. Resource Estimation and Budget Ceiling Determination Committee: (1) There shall
remain a resource estimation and budget ceiling determination committee as follows in order
to make an estimation of the internal income, funds to be received from revenue sharing,
grant, loan and other income, and outline its balanced distribution and determine the budget
ceiling:
(a) Chair or Mayor
-Coordinator
(b) Vice-chair or deputy Mayor
-Member
(c) Four members designated by the Chair or Mayor
to be representative also of women, Dalit or minorities
from among the members of the executive
-Member
(d) Chief Administrative Officer
-Member-Secretary
(2) While designating members as per section (c) of Sub-clause (1), the Chair or Mayor shall
designate members also from outside the political party that he/she is affiliated with.
Provided that in situation where other political parties are not represented in the executive
this provision of the Sub-clause shall not be applicable.
(3) The function, duties and rights of the committee as per Sub-clause (1) shall be as follows:
(a) Make projection of the internal income, income from revenue sharing, fiscal transfer from
Government of Nepal and provincial government, internal debt and other income,
(b) To prepare an outline for balanced development of the projected sources considering the
national and provincial priorities and local needs,
(c) To determine the total ceiling of the budget based on the estimation of resources for the
coming fiscal year,
(d) To determine the thematic budget ceiling,
(e) To develop foundation for prioritization of budget and programme based on the guidelines
from the Government of Nepal and provincial government, local financial situation and status
of internal income,
(f) To finalise guidelines related to formulation of thematic budget,
(g) To carry out other tasks based on the local level needs and decision in relation to the
resources estimation and determination of budget ceiling.
(4) Concerned staff and thematic expert may be invited as required to the meeting of the
committee as per Sub-clause (1).
(5) The procedures relating to the meeting of the committee as per Sub-clause (1) shall be as
determined by the committee.
(6) The committee as per Sub-clause (1) shall complete its tasks within the month of Falgun of
every year and budget project should be made also for additional two years after the coming
fiscal year.
(7) The budget ceiling for the coming fiscal year developed as per Sub-clause (1) shall be
provided to the thematic division, branch and ward committees of the rural municipality or
municipality by the Chief Administrative Officer within 15th Chaitra of every year.
(8) The thematic divisions, branch and ward committees should formulate and present to the
executive the plan, project, programme and estimated budget of the rural municipality or
municipality.
67. Budget and programme formulation committee: There shall remain a budget and
programme formulation committee as follows in order to formulate the annual budget
and programme of the local level based on the income projection and outline of
distribution and budget ceiling determined as per Clause 66:
(a) Vice-chair or Deputy Mayor
-Coordinator
(b) Members of the village executive and town
executive overseeing thematic areas
-Member
(c) Chief Administrative Officer
-Member
(d) Chief of planning division, department or branch
-Member
(2) The function, duties and rights of the committee as per Sub-clause (1) shall be as follows:
(a) To prepare a proposal of political and programme for the coming fiscal year,
(b) To prioritize budget and programme within the budget ceiling set by the committee as
per Clause 66.
(c) To make arrangement for thematic discussion on the budget and programme proposal
and prepare the final proposal and present it to the executive,
(d) To make arrangement to avoid duplication in the plan and programme and maintain
mutual compatibility and supplementary among the plan and programmes.
(e) Carry out other tasks as per the needs of the local level in relation to budget and
programme formulation.
68. Loan to be raised: (1) The rural municipality and municipality may raise domestic loan
for productive, employment-oriented, internal income generation and for capital
works after having it approved by the concerned assembly and by acting within the
limit of the recommendation of the national natural resource and fiscal commission.
(2) The loan as per Sub-clause (1) cannot be taken for a period of more than twenty-five years.
(3) If the loan raised with the Government of Nepal as its guarantor is not paid by the
concerned rural municipality or municipality within the prescribed time then the loan shall be
paid by deducting the grants to be provided by the Government of Nepal to such rural
municipality or municipality.
(4) Other provisions relating to the loan to be raised by the rural municipality and
municipality shall be as per the federal law.

Chapter-10
Financial working procedures of the rural municipality and municipality
69. Local consolidated fund: (1) There shall remain a separate consolidated fund of every
rural municipality and municipality.
(2) The following amount shall be credited to the fund as per Sub-clause (1):
(a) Funds received from Inland revenue and income,
(b) Funds received from revenue sharing,
(c) Grants and other amount received from the Government of Nepal,
(d) Grants and other amount received from the provincial government,
(e) Funds received from any individual, organisation as donation, grant etc.
(f) Funds provided from the foreign assistance received by the government for the rural
municipality and municipality based on national priority from foreign governments, agencies,
association or individuals,
(g) Grants and other funds received from another rural municipality and municipality,
(h) Funds received through domestic loan,
(i) Funds to be received from any other source.
(3) All the amount to be deposited into the fund of the rural municipality or municipality
shall be deposited in the designated bank account.
(4) The provision related to expenditure of the amount deposited in the fund as per Subclause (1) shall be as per the local law,
(5) While drafting law as per Sub-clause (5), it should be made as such that no amount shall be
debited from the fund except the amount as follows:
(a) The amount as per the annual budget approved to be spent from the consolidated fund by
the Assembly.
(b) In case of the annual budget being under consideration, the amount not exceeding onethird of the expenditures allocated in the budget under consideration in the form of advance
for daily operations,
(c) The amount to be paid or submitted by the rural municipality or municipality as per the
court’s verdict,
(d) The amount designated by the assembly for the emergency fund as per Clause (56).
(e) The principle and interest of the loan taken by the rural municipality and municipality.
70. Emergency Fund: The rural municipality and municipality may establish and operate an
emergency fund as per the local law.
71. Tabling and endorsement of budget: (1) The Deputy Mayor, Vice-Chair or any member
designated by the executive shall present the programme and budget estimates for the
next fiscal year within Asar 10 of every year before the Assembly after having it
approved by the executive.
(2) The annual budget and programme should include the factual details of income and
expenditure of the last fiscal year, amended estimates of income and expenditure up to the
end of the current fiscal year, and the plan and programmes, and estimated income and
expenditure of the coming fiscal year.
(3) The Assembly shall complete discussion on the programme and budget tabled as per Subclause (1) within 15 days by developing a schedule for it.
(4) Upon conclusion of the discussion as per Sub-clause (3), the assembly shall endorse the
budget or send it to the executive along with suggestions.
(5) The executive shall review the programme and budget received along with suggestion as
per Sub-clause (4) and table it again with necessary amendments or if amendment is not
deemed to be necessary then table along with reasons for the same before the assembly within
5 days.
(6) The assembly shall endorse the programme and budget submitted as per Sub-clause (1) or
(5) by the end of the month of Asar of the same year.
(7) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in this Clause, it shall not be deemed to have
obstructed to table the annual programme and budget and have it passed within two months
of the assumption of the post of office by the office-bearers of the rural municipality and
municipality formed by the first election.
(8) Other procedures relating to supplementary estimates and budget shall be as per the local
72. Financial year and accounts of income and expenditure: (1) The local level should
maintain the period between Saun first of every year to the month of Asad of next year as the
fiscal year, and maintain accounts of income and expenditure accordingly.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality shall adopt the classification of income and
expenditure and the provision of expenditure heading as determined by the Government of
Nepal.
(3) The rural municipality and municipality may, while acting as per Sub-clause (2), make
additional classification of income and expenditure without making any difference to the main
heading.
73. Authority and procedures for expenditure: (1) Upon approval of the appropriated
budget by the assembly, the Mayor or chair should grant the authority to spend the budget to
the chief administrative officer within seven days of such approval.
(2) Upon receiving the authority, the chief administrative officer shall grant the authority to
spend, as per the law, within the month of Ashar the programme and budget to the concerned
division or unit chief and ward secretary.
(3) It shall be the full responsibility of the officer receiving the authority to spend the amount
authorized to be spent as per Sub-clause (1) and (2) within the boundary of the approved
budget and as per the prevalent law, to make expenditure, maintain or cause to maintain
accounts, carry out audit and clear the arrears.
(4) The local consolidated fund shall be operated by the Chief Administrative Officer of the
rural municipality or municipality and accounts chief and the district coordination committee
fund by the district coordination officer and the accounts chief.
(5) The operation of the expenditure accounts shall be carried out by the Chief Administrative
Officer of the rural municipality or municipality or an officer-level staff assigned by the CAO
and accounts chief or accounts staff designated by him/her and of the district coordination
committee by the district coordination officer or an officer-level staff assigned by the DCO
and accounts chief or accounts staff designated by him/her.
(6) While spending the approved budget, the chief administrative officer shall make necessary
arrangement to maintain regularity, austerity, work efficiency, effectiveness and rationale.
(7) The executive shall not be allowed to spend the budget by going outside the approved
ceiling and heading.
74. Public procurement to be made: (1) The rural municipality and municipality shall make
public procurement as per the federal public procurement act.
(2) The rural municipality and municipality may draft and enforce public procurement
regulations under the Act as per Sub-clause (1).
75. To be deposited in consolidated fund: Any unspent amount of budget in a fiscal year
shall be automatically transferred to the consolidated fund of the rural municipality or
municipality at the end of the fiscal year.
76. Maintenance of Accounts of transaction: (1) The records of books and accounts of the
income and expenditure of the rural municipality and municipality and the classification of its
revenue and expenditure headings shall be as prescribed.
(2) The accounts of transaction of the local level shall be maintained in the format as approved
by the auditor general on the recommendation of the Office of the Comptroller General.
(3) The quarterly progress of the amount spent from the fund of rural municipality or
municipality should be submitted to the meeting of the executive by the Executive Officer
within 15 days of end of such period.
(4) The rural municipality and municipality, and ward office shall publish the details of the
income and expenditure within the 7th of every month.
(5) The rural municipality or municipality shall prepare a quarterly heading-wise details of
income and expenditure made in the local consolidated fund, and send it to the Ministry,
provincial financial ministry, the federal finance ministry and the national natural resources
and fiscal commission.
(6) Provided that the Government of Nepal or provincial government or local level suffer any
kind of damage and loss as a result of the failure of the official authorized to maintain
accounts of the transaction of the local level, the loss and damage so incurred shall be
recovered from the responsible person.
77. Auditing: (1) The local level shall carry out the final audit of its income and expenditure
from the Auditor General.
(2) The local level should carry out internal auditing of its income and expenditure as per the
(3) While carrying out the internal audit, the regularity and austerity should be audited and
the remarks pointed out by the internal auditor should be addressed by the concerned official
before the final auditing takes place.
(4) A copy of the internal auditing should be provided to the dora deputed for the final
auditing or the individual or agency as designated by the Auditor general.
78. To maintain internal control mechanism: (1) Every local level should develop and
enforce an internal control mechanism as per the nature of their work to execute the works to
be carried out by itself and through its office in an austere, efficient and effective manner, to
make the financial reporting system reliable and to carry out works as per the prevalent law.
(2) While developing the internal control mechanism as per Sub-clause (1), attention should
also be paid to issues like the environment of the control as per the nature of work,
identification of risk areas, exchange of information, monitoring and evaluation.
(3) To monitor the internal control mechanism as per Sub-clause (1) and (2), the concerned
local level Chair or Mayor or district coordination committee Chief should him/herself do the
work or designate a responsible officer to carry out the monitoring.
(4) The responsibility of improving the shortcomings/weakness observed through the
monitoring as per Sub-clause (3) and consolidate the internal control mechanism lies on the
concerned chair or mayor or district coordination committee chief.
(5) The rural municipality and municipality shall operate programmes like public audit, social
audit and public hearing in order to make public service delivery transparent, accountable and
responsive.
79. Transfer in budget heads: The executive may transfer the budget allocation amount
from one head to another not exceeding twenty percent of the amount of the head in the
approved annual budget.
80. Use of information technology: (1) The Ministry may designate the format of
information technology to be used in the field to maintain uniformity in the financial
procedures and administration functioning and to promote transparency and accountability.

Chapter-11
Administrative organisation and provision of staff
81. Office: The officer of the rural municipality and municipality and ward committee shall be
located at the centre of such rural municipality, municipality or ward.
82. Office seal: (1) The local level shall use the coat of arms of Nepal and may mention its
name at the lower border of such seal.
(2) The office as per Sub-clause (1) shall also serve as the Secretariat of the Executive.
83. Administrative organisation and employee positions: (1) The rural municipality and
municipality shall maintain an organisational structure including thematic units or divisions
in the rural municipality and municipality based on an organisation and management survey
considering their respective work load, revenue capacity, expenditure size, local needs and
speciality.
(2) The organisational structure as per Sub-clause (1) should also include the organisational
structure of every ward.
(3) (1) The executive officer shall, considering the jurisdiction and work load of the rural
municipality or municipality and on the basis of the organisation and management survey,
prepare a proposal for the post of employees necessary for the permanent nature of work and
to be hired through service contract.
(4) While preparing the proposal for the post of staff as per Sub-clause (1), the source of
expenditure incurred for salary, allowance, provident fund contribution, gratuity or pension
for the employees should also be analysed, and propose posts only by ensuring such
expenditure.
(5) Temporary posts shall not be created for the operation of the services of the local level.
(6) For works requiring expert service and found to be appropriate and effective to be
executed through service contract based on the organisation and management survey of the
rural municipality or municipality, it should be met through service contract.
(7) In the approved position (posts) for municipal police, the rural municipality or
municipality, municipal police can be recruited through open competition for a maximum of
five years at a time on service contract basis.
(8) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in the Clause, the provision of driver, office
assistant and for cleaning-related services should be made only through service contract.
(9) The remuneration and other facilities of the employees appointed on a service contract
basis as per Sub-clause (6), (7) and (8) shall as mentioned in the same contract.
(10) The organisation and management survey report presented as per this Clause should be
endorsed by the Assembly.
84. Provision relating to executive officer: (1) There shall remain a chief administrative
officer to serve as the administrative head in every rural municipality and municipality.
(2) Until the function, duties and rights of the chief administrative officer are not prescribed
by the local law, the function, duties and rights of the executive officer shall be as follows:
(a) To act as the Secretary of the Assembly and Executive,
(b) To enforce, cause to enforce the decision of the Assembly and Executive,
(c) Formulate annual programme and budget as per the direction of the Chair or Mayor,
implement and monitor and evaluate it,
(d) To maintain up-to-date records of the fund and financial transaction, and carry out audit,
and clear the arrears,
(e) To prepare and submit reports to conclude the projects before the executive meeting,
(f) To protect the movable and immovable property of the rural municipality or municipality,
maintain records, and keep them updated,
(g) Summon the meeting of the executive and assembly as per the direction of the Chair or
Mayor, and carry out other necessary tasks relating to the meeting.
(h) Certify the decision of the executive, and maintain safe records of the decision of the
Assembly and executive,
(i) To protect the documents related to the reconciliation/mediation and verdict of the
judicial committee,
(j)To maintain administrative and financial control of the rural municipality or municipality,
(k) Develop a public procurement plan and carrying out, cause to carry out the procurement
related works,
(l) To carry out other tasks as assigned by the assembly or executive.
(3) The appointment of the chief administrative officer shall be made as per the law.
(4) The Government of Nepal shall depute an officer-level employee from the civil service to
serve as the chief administrative officer until the appointment of the chief administrative
officer is made as per Sub-clause (3).
85. Employee adjustment: (1) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Act,
the provision related to employee adjustment at the local level shall be as per the prevalent
federal law.
(2) Until the adjustment of employee is made as per Sub-clause (1), the Government of Nepal
may depute any employee working in civil service and local level to the local level.
(3) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in Sub-clause (1), the permanent staff working at
the local level at the time of commencement of this Act shall be regarded to have
automatically adjusted in the concerned local level. The district coordination committee staff
may be deputed to the local level of the concerned district and deputation of staff accordingly
should be prioritized to the rural municipality and municipality without sufficient staffers.
86. Formation of local service, appointment of employees and terms of service: (1) The
basic principle and standards relating to formation, operation and management, and terms
and conditions of service of the local level shall be as per the federal law.
(2) Other provisions relating to formation, operation and management, and terms and
conditions of service of the local service shall be as per the law drafted by the local level within
the preview of Sub-clause (1).
(3) In the permanent post of local service, only the candidates selected and recommended by
the provincial service commission can be appointed.
(4) If the federation and province demands the records and details of the local service
employees, then it shall be the duty of the local level to provide such records and details.
87. Provision relating to competition: In the vacant positions to be fulfilled among the
approved permanent positions of the local level, the employees working continuously at the
time of the commencement of this act shall be given an opportunity to sit in the open and
internal competitive first advertisement examinations to be conducted by the Public Service
Commission following the commencement of this Act. The age bar shall not apply to such
employees to sit for the first advertisement examinations. They shall automatically retire if
they do not attend the examinations or fail in it.
88. Salary of employees: The starting scale of the salary of the local service employees shall
be as per the standard prescribed by the Provincial government and it shall be as prescribed by
the Ministry until it is prescribed by the provincial government accordingly.
89. To be deputed: (1) Based on the demand of the local level and if found appropriate, the
Government of Nepal may depute any employee of civil service for a maximum of two years to
be paid at the local level itself.
90. To adopt a hierarchical system: The local level shall adopt a hierarchical system based
on classification during formation, operation and management of the local service.
91. Provision of retirement fund: (1) The local level shall establish a retirement fund for the
gratuity or pension based on contribution, medical treatment and other facilities to be
received by a local service employee upon retirement as per the his/her terms of service.
(2) The local level shall deduct 10 per cent from the monthly salary of every employee working
under its posts and add 12 per cent of such salary to the fund as per Sub-clause (1).
(3) The amount deposited as per Sub-clause (2) shall be used to provide medical treatment
facility, gratuity or pension based on contribution as per the law upon retirement to the
concerned employee.
(4) Amount from the retirement fund as per this Clause cannot be spent for any other
purpose.
(5) Other provisions related to the retirement fund shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-12
Provision related to district council/assembly
92. Function, duties and rights of the district assembly: (1) In addition to the function,
duties and rights mention in Article 220 (7) of the Constitution, the function, duties and rights
of the district assembly shall be as follows:
(a) To carry out necessary coordination works to identify and manage the issues of
development construction between rural municipality or municipality within the district,
(b) To develop details of the development works being carried out by the government and
non-government sector within the district, carry out monitoring at various stages of
development plan and programme, and provide necessary recommendations or guidelines to
maintain community, thematic and ecological balance in the outcome area of such project or
programme, and make the recommendations or guidelines public.
(c) To work in coordination with the province and federation for capacity building of the rural
municipality and municipality within the district,
(d) To carry out coordination between the federal or provincial government office and the
rural municipality and municipality in the district.
(e) In case of any dispute among the rural municipalities and municipalities within the
district, carry out coordination and facilitation to resolve it.
(f) To coordinate the plan and task related to natural calamity and disaster management
within the district,
(g) To coordinate with the non-government organisation and private sector in order to
maintain balance in the works relating to development and construction within the district.
(h) To carry out study, research and monitoring of the balance in the works relating to
development and construction within the district and provide suggestion to maintain balance
in development constructions work to the ministry, the ministry of the provincial government
overseeing the local level matters and as required also to the concerned rural municipality and
municipality,
(i) To report to the ministry and the ministry of the provincial government overseeing the
local level matters about its activities within two months of the end of every fiscal year,
(j) Organise annual review programme at least once in a year to make the development and
construction works within the district effective and seek suggestions by inviting members of
parliament represented in the federal parliament and provincial assembly from the district,
(k) Carry out other tasks assigned by the government of Nepal or provincial government.
(2) The work to be carried out by the district assembly shall be in the name of the district
coordination committee.
(3) The district assembly shall develop an annual programme and budget in the areas of its
jurisdiction and enforce it after having it approved by the district assembly.
(4) The district assembly may formulate and enforce necessary procedures, guidelines and
standards in its matters of jurisdiction.
93. District Assembly budget: (1) The Government of Nepal shall provide the budget
necessary to the district assembly.
(2) The funds received as per Sub-clause (1) and from other sources shall be deposited in the
funds of the district assembly.
(3) The facilities to be received by the District Coordination Committee members shall be
borne from the budget to be received as per Sub-clause (1).
94. Provision related to district coordination officer and employees: (1) There shall
remain a district coordination officer as the administrative chief in every district assembly.
(2) The function, duties and rights of the district coordination officer shall be as follows:
(a) To work as the Secretary of the district assembly and the district coordination committee,
(b) To implement, cause to implement the decision of the district coordination committee,
(c) To coordinate the federation and provincial government offices in the district with the
local level,
(d) To maintain up-to-date accounts of the financial transaction of the district assembly, carry
out audit, clear arrears, and develop proposal for exemption of arrears and submit before the
district coordination committee.
(e) To protect the movable and immovable property of the district assembly, maintain a
record of it, and update it.
(f) Summon the meeting of the district coordination committee and the assembly as per the
directive of the Chief, manage the meeting, be present, take the minutes of the decision, take
responsibility of the decision booklet, certify the decision, and carry out other essential task
related to the meeting.
(g) To carry out other tasks as assigned as per the law by the district assembly or district
coordination committee or Chief of the district coordination committee.
(3) The Government of Nepal shall depute any officer level employee of civil service to work as
the District Coordination Officer.
(4) The district coordination committee shall, on the basis of its work leader and on the
organisation and management survey, develop a proposal for the positions of employees
essential for permanent nature of work and those to be taken on a service contract basis.
(5) The proposal for positions of employees as per Sub-clause (4) should be made by analyzing
and ensures the sources that would bear the facilities like salary, allowance, provident fund,
gratuity or pension based on contribution, leave related to medical treatment etc.
(6) While developing proposal for positions as per Sub-clause (4), the proposal for positions
should be made by analysing the salary, allowance required for service contract and expenses
for services like contribution-based social security, and ensuring such expenses.
(7) Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere in this Clause, the district coordination
committee shall not recruit driver, office assistant, plumber, electrician and cleaning staff in
permanent posts but acquire them through service contract based on a bidding. Recruitment
cannot be made through service contracts in posts other than those.
(8) The district coordination committee cannot create temporary positions.
95. To work in coordination with the district assembly: The Government of Nepal or
provincial government offices in the district shall work in coordination with the district
coordination committee.
96. District Assembly and District Coordination Committee meeting: (1) The meeting of
the district assembly shall be held for at least once in a year and of the district
coordination committee at least once in a month.
(2) The district coordination committee chief shall summon the meeting of the district
assembly and the district coordination committee.
Provided that the eldest member among the members of the assembly shall call the meeting
until the head of the district assembly is elected.
(3) The district assembly and district coordination committee meeting shall be chaired by the
district coordination committee chair. In his/her absence, the district coordination
committee vice-chair and in absence of the vice-chair the eldest members among the
members present in the meeting shall chair the meeting.
(4) The presence of more than fifty per cent of the total number of immediately existing
members in the district assembly and district coordination committee shall be
regarded to have fulfilled the quorum required for the meeting of the district assembly
and district coordination committee.
(5) The decision of the district assembly and district coordination committee shall be taken
unanimously and in case of a failure to forge unanimity, the decision taken by a
majority of the members present in the assembly or committee shall be regarded as the
decision of the district assembly and district coordination committee.
(6) Other provisions related to the meeting of the district assembly and district coordination
committee shall be as determined by the assembly and committee.
(7) The provision relating to meeting in this clause shall be applicable only until the provincial
law provides otherwise for the meeting of the district assembly and district
coordination committee.

Chapter-13
Provision related to protection of the asset of the local level
97. Protection of asset within the rural municipality and municipality: The rural municipality
or municipality should supervise, repair, maintain and manage the following properties within
its area:
(a) Government, community and public property,
(b) Properties constructed and purchased from its own fund or granted to it by the
Government of Nepal or provincial government or any organization or individual.
(c) Public drainage, sewerage, bridges, ponds, temples, public rest houses, inns, houses, water
springs, water-spouts, wells, grazing fields, outlets, courtyards, alleys, roads, paths and trees
on either side of the roads.
(d) The buildings, land, parks, gardens, bus-parks, rest place and other structures under its
ownership.
(e) Other forests under its jurisdiction except national park, wildlife reserve, wetlands and
national forest.
(f) Other natural heritages except those under the jurisdiction of the Government of Nepal or
provincial government as per the constitution and the prevalent law.
(g) Natural heritage and area designated as per the prevalent law by the Government of Nepal
or Provincial government.
(2) The rural municipality or municipality shall not be allowed to sell and dispose of or
otherwise relinquish its title and possession on the public properties as referred to in subclause (1).
(3) The rural municipality or municipality shall not be allowed to sell or dispose or relinquish
of the title of any immovable property under its name without the approval of the
Government of Nepal.
(4) The rural municipality and municipality shall maintain updated records of its assets as per
Sub-clause (1).
98. Protection of the asset of the district assembly: (1) The district assembly shall have
right over the following assets in the scope of the district assembly and the district assembly
shall have to protect, renovate and maintain such property, and other arrangements:
(a) Immovable property including the land, building, vehicle, machine tools etc under the
ownership of the district assembly or procured or constructed through the funds of the district
assembly.
(b) Asset received with handover of ownership from the government of Nepal or provincial
government or any organisation and individual.
(2) The district assembly cannot sell or leave the right to own/use the asset as per Sub-clause
(1) without the approval of the government of Nepal.
(3) Notwithstanding whatever is written elsewhere in this Act, it shall not obstruct the
Ministry from handing over the right to use or ownership of any immovable property found to
be in excess for the use of the district assembly or as recommended by the district assembly to
any rural municipality or municipality or other government agencies.
Provided that while transferring rights in the case of land or building, the decision should be
made from the Government of Nepal.

Chapter-14
Provision related to special, protected or autonomous region
99. Special, protected or autonomous region to be maintained: (1) The Government of
Nepal may, in consultation with the provincial government, maintain any area as a
special, protected or autonomous region by publishing a notice in the Nepal gazette
for social and culture preservation or economic development:
(a) One or more than one district,
(b) One or more than one rural municipality or municipality,
(c) Any ward or more than one ward of any rural municipality or municipality.
100. Special programme to be operated: The Government of Nepal and provincial
government may run special programmes or provide additional budget for such special
programmes to be carried out for the development of the special, protected or autonomous
regions as per Clause 84.
101. Special programmes to be carried out in coordination with local level: While
running special programmes in the special, protected or autonomous region, the government
of Nepal and the provincial government should do it in coordination with the concerned
district assembly, rural municipality and municipality.

Chapter-15
Miscellaneous
102. To draft local laws: (1) The rural municipality and municipality may formulate Act on
matters under their jurisdiction,
(2) The executive may, while acting under the Act drafted as per Sub-clause (1), draft
regulations, guidelines, procedures and standards as required.
(3) The rural municipality and municipality shall publish officially the laws drafted as per Subclause (1) and (2).
(4) The laws drafted as per Sub-clause (1) and (2) shall be sent by the rural municipality and
municipality to the provincial government and the Government of Nepal.
(5) The laws shall not be enforced until they are published as per Sub-clause (3).
103. Recommendation to be made: (1) Unless designated in the prevalent law for any agency
to make recommendation on any matter, the executive shall have the right to make
recommendation on any other matter.
104. Asset, liability and budget transfer: Based on the power received by the rural
municipality and municipality as per the constitution and this Act, the thematic ministry of
Government of Nepal shall, within six month from the date of commencement of this Act,
review the organisational structure of its subordinate bodies, and make arrangement to send
to the concerned rural municipality and municipality the asset, liabilities and budget as per
the work responsibilities of the rural municipality or municipality.
105. Provincial Coordination Council: (1) There shall remain a provincial coordination
council to maintain coordination between the province and local level on issues of policy
adjustment in areas of provincial and local governance, strategic partnership and guidelines in
plan management, exercise of common/concurrent jurisdiction, utilization and sharing of
natural resources.
(2) The council as per Sub-clause (1) shall consist of following members:
(a) Chief Minister
Coordinator
(b) Provincial government ministers
Member
(c) Chief Secretary of the Province
Member
(d) Provincial government secretaries
Member
(e) Chief of the district coordination committee in the province
Member
(f) Chair of rural municipality and mayor of municipality in the province
Member
(g) Secretary, the Ministry of the provincial government overseeing local level
Member-Secretary
(3) The office-bearer of the Ministry and experts may be invited as observers to the Council as
per Sub-clause (2).
(4) The meeting of the Council as per Sub-clause (2) shall be held at least once in a year.
(5) The working procedures related to the meeting of the Council as per Sub-clause (2) shall
be as determined by the Council.
106. To be supported: (1) The Government of Nepal and provincial government should
support the rural municipality and municipality as follows:
(a) Provide the guidelines including budget ceiling, national and provincial priorities,
standards of the federal government and provincial government prior to the beginning of the
process of formulation of the annual plan and budget of the rural municipality and
municipality.
(b) In matters under jurisdiction of the local level, dissolve parallel office at the local level and
instead enhance the capacity of the thematic unit or section of the rural municipality and
municipality.
(c) To operate the projects and programmes to be implemented in the rural municipality and
municipality under the jurisdiction of the line ministry in coordination with the rural
municipality and municipality.
(d) The development works under the jurisdiction of the federal and provincial government
that would be effective to be executed at the rural municipality and municipality level should
be arranged to be executed from the rural municipality and municipality and the budget and
human resources associated with it should also be sent to the concerned rural municipality
and municipality.
(e) To draft and send model law as per the need of the rural municipality and municipality.
(f) To support the enforcement of the decision of the rural municipality and municipality,
(g) To carry out other necessary tasks for the empowerment of the rural
municipality and municipality.
(2) The government of Nepal and the provincial government should provide
necessary support to the district coordination committee to carry out works on
matters under the jurisdiction of the committee.
107. Provision related to by-election of ward Chair: If the post of the ward chair falls
vacant for any reason with more than a year of the term remaining the vacant post
shall be filled for the remaining term through by-election.
108. Provision related to election of District Coordination Committee: If the post of the
chair, vice-chair or member of the district coordination committee falls vacant as per

Article 220 (6) of the constitution then it shall be filled by holding elections as per
Clause (3) of the same Article.
109. Oath: (1) Prior to assuming office, the Chairperson and Mayor shall take the oath of office
and secrecy before the district judge of the concerned district in the format as per Schedule-2
within seven days from the date of being elected.
(2) The Vice-chair, deputy mayor, ward chairperson and assembly members shall take the oath
of office and secrecy in the format as per Schedule-2 before the concerned Chairperson or
Mayor within seven days after the oath by the Chair and Mayor.
(3) Prior to assuming office, the Chief of the District Coordination Committee shall take the
oath of office and secrecy before the concerned district judge within seven days of being
elected and the Deputy Chief and members of the District Coordination Committee before the
Chief of the Concerned District Coordination Committee within seven days of the DDC Chief
in the format as per Schedule-2 within seven days from the date of being elected.
110. To submit property details: (1) The member shall submit in the prescribed format to the
concerned local level the details of the movable and immovable property under his/her and
his immediate related family member’s name within sixty days of assuming the post and from
the end of the fiscal year.
(2) The details of the property submitted as per Sub-clause (1) should be sent to the provincial
government by the concerned local level within thirty days, after maintaining a record of it.
(3) The protection and management of the details received as per Sub-clause (2) should be
carried out by the provincial government as per the prevalent law.
(4) The property details submitted as per this Clause shall be confidential except for the
purpose of judicial inquiry or investigation as per the prevalent law.
Provided that it shall not obstruct the member submitting such details to make it public
voluntarily.
111. Proportional inclusivity to be maintained: Proportional inclusivity should be
maintained while making appointments or nominations to the committee, subcommittees or
task force to be formed as per this Act.
112. Development and enforcement of code of conduct: (1) The local level may develop and
enforce a code of conduct for its members and staff.
(2) The code of conduct as per Sub-clause (1) should include among other things to not to be
involved in the decision making in matters related to one’s person interest or rights, to adopt
transparency, accountability working process, to not misuse public property, promoting public
good conduct and good governance, and respect another local level’s, province and
federation’s working system and jurisdiction.
113. Work not to be regarded as annulled: Notwithstanding whatsoever is written elsewhere
in this Act, any function carried out by the rural municipality or municipality shall not be
annulled/repealed only due to the reason of the post of any member remaining vacant at the
rural municipality or municipality.
114. Directives to be followed: (1) It shall be the responsibility of the concerned local level to
follow the directives of the Government of Nepal issued as per Article 232 (8) of the
Constitution.
115. Executive to exercise powers: Unless clearly provided in this Act that the Assembly
shall, the executive shall carry out the function to be executed by the rural municipality and
municipality.
116. To work as officiating: (1) If the position of the ward chair falls vacant for any reason, the
member selected by the ward committee members from among themselves shall
service as the officiating ward chair.
(2) In case of absence of election in any ward, the executive may designate any employee as
the ward chair until the election is held.
117. Liaison Ministry: (1) The local level should liaise with the government of Nepal through
the Ministry.
(2) The local level should liaise with the provincial government through the Ministry of the
Province that oversees local affairs.
118. Government of Nepal to carry out the function of provincial government: The
function to be carried out by the provincial government shall be carried out by the
Government of Nepal until the provincial government is formed.
119. Power to draft rules: The Government of Nepal may draft necessary rules for the
implementation of this Act.
120. To be applicable as per this Act: Notwithstanding whatsoever is written in the
prevalent Act, the matters addressed in this Act shall be as per this Act.
121: Repeal and Savings:
(1) The following acts are hereby repealed:
(a) The local self-governance act, 2055 (1999).
(b) Act relating to determination of number of ward of rural municipality and municipality,
2073 (2016)
(2) The acts done and actions taken under the Acts as mentioned in Sub-clause (1) shall be
deemed to have been done and taken under this Act.
Schedule-1
(Related to Sub-section (1) of Section (a) of Sub-clause (1) of Clause 8)
Details of Mountain, hilly and inner Madhesh and Tarai districts
(a) Mountain
districts
1. Taplejung
2. Sankhuwasab
3. Solukhumbu
4. Dolakha
5. Sindhupalcho
6. Rasuwa
7. Manang
8. Mustang
9. Dolpa
10. Jumla
11. Mugu
12. Humla
13. Kalikot
14. Bajura
15. Bajhang
16. Darchula
17. Dhading
(b) Hilly districts
1. Paanchthar
2. Ilam
3. Terhathum
4. Dhankuta
5. Bhojpur
6. Okhaldhunga
7. Khotang
8. Kavrepalancho
9. Nuwakot
10. Lamjung
11. Tanahu
12. Kaski
13. Syangja
14. Parbat
15. Myagdi
16. Baglung
17. Palpa
18. Arghakhanchi
(c) Inner
Madesh districts
1. Udayapur
2. Makwanpur
3. Chitwan
4. Sindhuli
5. Nawalparasi
(east of
Bardaghat
Susta)
6. Dang
7. Surkhet
(d) Tarai
districts
1. Jhapa
2. Morang
3. Sunsari
4. Saptari
5. Siraha
6. Dhanusa
Mahottari
8. Sarlahi
9. Rautahat
10. Bara
11. Parsa
Nawalparas
i (west of
Bardaghat
Susta)
Rupandehi
Kapilvastu
Kathma
valley
districts
Kathma
2. Lalitpur
3. Bhaktapur
18. Ramechhap
19. Gorkha
20. Rukum (east)
19. Gulmi
20. Rukum (west)
21. Rolpa
22. Pyuthan
23. Salyan
24. Jajarkot
25. Dailekh
26. Doti
27. Achham
28. Baitedi
29. Dadeldhura
15. Banke
16. Bardia
17. Kailali
Kanchanpu
Schedule-2
(Relating to Clause 94)
Format of Oath
I …….. ……… …….., being completely loyal to the country and people, do hereby solemnly
resolve / swear in the name of God/country and people that I shall, with genuine loyalty
towards the Constitution of Nepal, that enshrines that sovereignty is vested in the people of
Nepal, truthfully and impartially carry out duties of the post of rural municipality chair/vicechair/member, village assembly member, town executive mayor/deputy mayor/member, town
assembly member, district coordination committee chief/deputy chief/member, district
assembly member with honesty, by working within the limits of the existing laws, always
thinking the good of the country and the people, without fear, biasness, prejudice or ill-will,
and by maintaining the confidentiality of the position.
Date __________________
Name _______________________
Signature ____________________

===== SOURCE: Narcotic Drugs (Control) Act(2033).pdf =====

Narcotic Drugs (Control) Act, 2033 (1976)
Date of Authentications and publication :
2033/6/10 ( 22 sectember 1976)
ACT NO. 24 OF THE YEAR 2033 (1976)
1. Narcotic Drugs (Control) (First Amendment) Act, 2043
2043/7/24
2. Narcotic Drugs (Control) (Second Amendment) Act, 2044
2044/6/9
3. Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2048
2049/1/8
4. Narcotic Drugs (Control) (Forth Amendment) Act, 2049
2050/2/32
5. Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2055
2055/10/7

Chapter 1
Preliminary
Short Title, Extent and Commencement : (1) This Act may be called the
"Narcotic Drugs (Control) Act, 2033 (1976)."
(2) It shall extend throughout Nepal.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
Extra Territorial Application of the Act : (1) This Act shall also be (apply) to
Nepalese citizen or foreigner, who, while residing in a foreign country, conduct
transaction of export or import of narcotic drugs from or into Nepal in
contravention of this Act or Rules framed or order issued hereunder.
(2) Any person who commits any act mentioned under Sub-section (1)
shall be prosecuted and punished according to this Act as if he/she had
committed such act within Nepal.
Definition : In this Act, Unless the subject or context otherwise requires :-
(a) "Narcotic Drug" means:
(1) Cannabis/ marijuana
(2) Medicinal cannabis/ marijuana
(3) Opium
(4) Processed opium
(5) Medicinal opium
(6) Plants and leaves of coca, and
♣(6A) Any substances to be prepared by mixing opium
and extract coca, including mixture or salt.
(7) Any natural or synthetic narcotic drug or psychotropic
substances and their salts and other substances as may be
specified by the Government of Nepal by a notification
published in the Nepal Gazette, from time to time,
(b) "Cannabis/ marijuana" means:
(1) Any plant of cannabis/ marijuana genus including hemp and
siddha
and also includes the leaves and flowers thereof.
(2) Natural resin, gum, and sap obtained from Hashish (chares)
and cannabis/ marijuana plants, and,
(3) Any substance containing any of the extract, substance,
essence, mixture and beverage containing any of the
substances mentioned above.
"Medicinal cannabis/ marijuana" means the extract or essence of
cannabis/ marijuana.
"Opium" means the coagulated juice of the opium poppy.
"Processed opium" means the opium prepared for consumption and also
includes the residue left after smoking such opium.
"Medicinal opium" means the opium prepared in any form following
any formula (method) for medicinal purposes.
"Plants and leaves of coca" means the plants and leaves of any plant of
the erythroxylon genus as defined in the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
"Preparation" means the solid or liquefied mixture of one or more
narcotic drugs to be prepared in the form of dosage.
"Production" means the extraction of cannabis/ marijuana, hemp, Siddha
Hashish (chares) from the cannabis/ marijuana plant or the separation of
leaves from coca plants.
"Manufacture" means all the forms of extraction of narcotic drugs, other
than production and this term also includes the processing of narcotic
drugs, transformation of one kind of narcotic drug into another, or the
process of preparing narcotic drugs other than for medical purposes.
♣ (j1) "Controlled delivery" (Controlled payment technique) means the drugs
technique of allowing traffic of narcotic drugs putting it into the pocket
in the original condition or any thing like that instead of narcotic drugs
under the direct supervision of the Narcotic Investigation Authority, with
a view to identifying the final destination and the recipient person
involved in the illicit traffic of the narcotic drugs from or through the
Nepal to other countries.
♣ (j2) "Investigating Authority" means personnel at least up to the rank of
Assistant sub-inspector of police or at least up to the rank of Kharidar,
designated by the chief of Narcotic Drugs Control Law Enforcement
Agency, in course of the investigation of the narcotic drugs control.
♣ (j3) "Treatment
Centre"
means
treatment
centre
approved
Government of Nepal for the treatment and rehabilitation of narcotic
drug addicts.
♣ (j4) "Addiction" means the act of consumption of narcotic drugs in more than
the dosage and quantity even under the prescription of recognized
medical practitioner or without the prescription of such medical
practitioner.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
"Drugs Control Officer" means the officer appointed or designated by
Government of Nepal pursuant to Section 21.
"Prescribed" or "As Prescribed" means prescribed or ∇as prescribed in
the Rules framed or orders issued under this Act.

Chapter 2
Prohibition and Control
Prohibited Acts : No person shall:
♦(a) Cultivate, produce, prepare, purchase, sell, distribute, export or
import, conduct any trafficking, store, or consume cannabis/
marijuana,
♥(b) Cultivate opium or coca or produce opium or coca leaves or other
narcotic drugs,
Manufacture or prepare narcotic drugs,
Sell or distribute narcotic drugs,
Export or import narcotic drugs,
♥(f) Purchase, store, possess, or conduct any trafficking narcotic drugs,
∇(g) Consume narcotic drugs other than cannabis/ marijuana.
Provided that:
(1) Government of Nepal may frame Rules regulating the
production of hashish (chares) from wild cannabis/
marijuana plants growing in the western hilly region of the
Nepal and the collection, storage, sale and purchase of such
hashish (chares) for a specified period, and no act done by
any person in accordance with the license obtained under
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .
♦ Amended by second amendment.
♥ Amended by First amendment .
♥ Amended by First amendment .
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .
such Rules shall be deemed to constitute an offence under
this Section.
⊕(1A) Chemical substance to be used for preparation of narcotic
drugs from among the medicines defined in the Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 may be exported,
imported, stored, conducted trafficking, sold, distributed
and used only in the quantity as prescribed by the Chief
Narcotic Drugs Control Officer.
(2) The procedure of the license issued under Clause (1) of this Proviso
and format and condition of such license, license issuing Authority, fee to be
charged for such license and any other measure to be taken for the control and
management of the activities under such license shall be as prescribed.
∇Explanation : For the purpose of Clause (b),(c),(d),(e) and (f) of this section
the "narcotic drugs" shall not mean the cannabis/ marijuana.
Non-applicability of Prohibitions: Notwithstanding anything contained in
other Sections of this Act, consumption of narcotic drugs by persons falling
under the following categories in the following circumstances shall not be
deemed to have been prohibited:-
(a) Purchase and consumption of narcotic drug by any person in the
recommended
licensed
recommendation of any recognized medical practitioner for the
purpose of medical treatment.
(b) Consumption of narcotic drugs by persons belonging to the
prescribed categories in prescribed doses.
∇5A. Note to be made on the prescription Paper of the Medical Practitioner :
If a person comes to purchase narcotic drugs with the prescription of a
recognized medical practitioner the licensed shop keeper shall make a note of the
⊕ Inserted by Second Amendment .
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .
sale on the prescription paper of the medical practitioner after narcotic drugs is
sold to such person.
⊕5B. Responsibility of the Medical Practitioner: While prescribing narcotic drugs,
the medical practitioner shall not prescribe it to those who do not need it or
prescribe more than what the requirement is even to those to whom it is required.
Prohibition not to be applied to Government of Nepal : Nothing contained in
this Act shall be deemed to have prevented Government of Nepal or any
institution working under the full and complete supervision and control of
Government of Nepal after obtaining a special license, from cultivating,
preparation, producing, manufacturing, exporting or importing narcotic drugs for
purposes of medicine or scientific research or from selling narcotic drugs to any
person on the recommendation of a recognized medical practitioner.
Authority Empowered to Issue Warrants : The Narcotic Drugs Control
Officer may issue warrants for the arrest and search of any person if he/she has
reason to believe that such person has committed or is about to commit any
offence punishable under this Act. The Narcotic Control Officer may issue orders
for conducting a search of any building, land, vehicle or any other place if he/she
has reason to believe that any person connected with the offence has been hiding
in such building, land, vehicle or other place or that any narcotic drug has been
kept therein.
Power to Enter, Search, Seize and Arrest Without a Warrant : (1) If there is
reason to believe that any offence punishable under this Act is being committed
in any building, land, vehicle or other place and that the offender may escape or
that evidence of the offense may disappear, the Narcotic Drugs Control Officer or
a police personnel at least up to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police
may, after making a record to that effect, take any of the following actions at any
time:-
To enter into such building, land, vehicle or any other place,
⊕ Inserted by Second Amendment .
(b) To break the gate or resort to other necessary actions if any
obstruction is caused to such entry,
To seize all narcotic drugs and other materials connected with the
offence, and any other document which may serve as evidence,
(d) To detain and to search any person and if necessary, arrest
him/her if there is a reason to suspect that such a person has
committed an offence.
(2) Entry into or search of any building, land, vehicle or any other place
under Sub-section (1) shall be conducted, if time so allows, in the presence of a
∂member of the concerned Municipality or Village Development Committee or
any local gentleman or an employee of any government office.
♣Provided that, if there is proper ground of non-availability of a member
of Municipality or Village Development Committee or Ward Committee or
gentlemen of that locality or presence of employees of other government offices
for preparing the report, even of attempts were made to that effect, the report
may be prepared in the presence of at least two Narcotic Drug Investigation
Officers or in the presence of two personnel at least to the rank of Assistant
sub-inspector of police.
♣8A. The Particulars of Financial Transaction may be Demanded : (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing laws, if there is reliable
ground that any person, organisation-institution, firm, company or international
organisation has carried out illegal transaction of narcotic drugs, the Narcotic
Drugs Control Officer may ask for the particulars of the account of such person,
firm, organisation - institution, company or international organisation, kept in
any bank or financial institutions.
(2) In case the amount mentioned in the particular obtained pursuant to
Sub-section (1), is seen to be used in the illegal transaction of narcotic drugs,
∂ Amended by Some Nepal Act Amendment Act , 2048
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
the judicial authority may give order to the concerned bank or financial
institution for freezing such amount.
Report of Arrest and Seizure to be submitted : - When an arrest is made of
any person or search is undertaken of any person, building, land, vehicle or any
other place, or if any narcotic drug or other material is seized under this Act, the
Narcotic Drugs Control Officer shall submit a report thereon to his/her
immediate superior within twenty four hours of such arrest, search or seizure.
♣9A. Secrecy to be maintained : In case a demand is made by the case filing party
for maintaining secrecy of the name of the person or documents involved in a
case relating to narcotic drugs, the judicial authority shall have to keep secret
such document or the name of person up to the period as per demand.
10. Arrested person and seized goods to be produced before the Judicial
Authority : Any person arrested or goods seized by the Narcotic Drugs Control
Officer under this Act shall be produced before ♥the Judicial Authority within
twenty four hours of such arrest or seizure excluding the period of journey from
the place of arrest to such Authority.
♣10A. Anything may be taped or censored : If there is an order from Investigating
Authority or Judicial Authority the Narcotic Drugs Control Officer, in course of
investigation of narcotic drugs, may tape the electronic devices like telephone,
telex, fax of the person related to narcotic drugs, may receive copy, or may take
photograph and may censor any sorts of documents to be received from post
like letter, parcel document.
♦11. The Narcotic Drugs Control Officer may issue an order to destroy Narcotic
Drugs : The Narcotic Drugs Control Officer may issue an order to destroy the
following Narcotic Drugs:-
(a) Cannabis/ marijuana, opium or coca which is being cultivated in
any land in contravention of this Act,
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♥ Amended by First amendment .
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♦ Amended by second amendment.
(b) The wildly grown cannabis/ marijuana, opium and coca on areas
other than those exempted under Section 4.
(c) Any narcotic drugs which are found unclaimed, and
(d) The Narcotic Drugs related to such offences regarding which no
case could be filed in a court of law under this Act.
11A. Narcotic Drugs to be destroyed after being the time extended from the
court in the narcotic drug case : After the narcotic drug is raided from any
person, Narcotic Drugs Control Officer shall, after taking up to three grams of
narcotic drugs from each packet as sample in the presence of Assistant Sub Inspector of police and an employee assigned by the judicial authority, send for
examination, the investigating authority of the narcotic case shall keep the
sample of the narcotic drug to find out the nature of the narcotic drug, and after
the case is filed in the court for extending the time, the court shall keep upto
three grams of narcotic drugs from each pocket for sample and shall in the
presence of representative of the concerned district court, representative of the
district administration office and the representative of local Municipality or
Village Development Committee, within fifteen days from the date of filing of
the case in the court for the extension of time.
11B The records of destroying of narcotic drugs to be maintained : The
concerned authority shall, while destroying narcotic drugs under Section 11 and
11A, maintain record of the types and quantity of narcotic drugs.
⊕11C. Government of Nepal may make available the Narcotic Drugs for
Preparing Medicine : Notwithstanding anything contained in other provisions
of this Act, Government of Nepal may, if it deems necessary, for cannabis/
marijuana the purpose of preparing medicine, make available in the required
quantity of cannabis/ marijuana and opium out of the narcotic drugs confiscated
or seized under this Act to any agency which is engaged in the production of
medicine.
 Amended by the third Amendment .
 Amended by the third Amendment .
⊕ Inserted by Second Amendment .
♣11D. May be submitted as evidence : (1) The documents collected in abroad, in
course of investigation of narcotic drugs, may be presented before the
judicial authority as evidence.
(2) The investigating authority may, in course of investigation of the
narcotic drugs, present video tape, cassette tape and any other types of photos
before the judicial authority as evidence.
12. Onus of Proof : In case any narcotic drug is found to be in possession of any
person or if any evidence is found that cannabis/ marijuana, opium or coca is
being cultivated or had been cultivated in any farm of a person or if any
substance that has been partly processed for the manufacture or production of
any narcotic drug or any residue left after such production is found to be in
possession of any person, such person shall have to furnish proof to the effect
that he/she has obtained or possessed such substance under this Act or the Rules
framed or orders issued hereunder. If he/she fails to do so, he shall, unless
otherwise established, be deemed to have committed an offence punishable
under this Act.
13. ∝....................

Chapter 3
Penalties
14. Penalties : (1) The person, acting in violation of the prohibitions laid down in
Clause (a) of Section (4), shall be punished according to the gravity of offence
as follows:-
Anyone who consumes cannabis/ marijuana shall be punished
with an imprisonment for a term up to one month or with a fine
unto two thousand rupees.
Provided that, in case of a person who is in the responsibility of a
person or institution who have made bond for doing treatment
upto one month in the treatment centre, the judicial authority may
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
∝ Deleted by second Amendment.
 Amended by the third Amendment .
not punish such person, on the condition of submitting the reports
of treatment fortnightly from the treatment centre.
Anyone who cultivates unto twenty five cannabis/ marijuana
plants shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term unto
three months or with a
fine unto three thousand rupees.
Anyone who cultivates more than twenty five cannabis/
marijuana plants shall be punished with an imprisonment for a
term of three year or with a fine from five thousand to twenty
five thousand rupees.
Anyone who produces, prepares, purchases, sells and distributes,
exports or imports, traffics and stores, cannabis/ marijuana shall
be punished as follows:-
(1) with an imprisonment for a term upto three months or with
a fine upto rupees three thousand, if it is upto fifty grams.
(2) With an imprisonment for a term from one month to one
year and with a fine from one thousand to five thousand
rupees, if it is within fifty grams to five hundred grams.
(3) With an imprisonment for a term from six months to two
years and with a fine from rupees two thousands to ten
thousands, if it is within five hundred grams to two
kilograms.
(4) With an imprisonment for a term from one year to three
years and with a fine from rupees five thousands to twenty
five thousands, if it is within two kilograms to ten
kilograms.
(5) With an imprisonment for a term from two years to ten
years and with a fine from fifteen thousands to rupees one
hundred thousand, if it is ten kilograms or more than this.
(e) Anyone who consumes opium, coca or any other narcotic drugs
made therefrom shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term
of upto one year or with a fine upto ten thousand rupees.
Provided that, in case of a person who is in the
responsibility of a person or institution, who have made bond for
doing treatment upto three months, in the treatment centre, the
judicial authority may not punish such person on the condition of
submitting the information of treatment fortnightly from the
treatment centre.
Anyone who cultivates opium poppy or coca bush shall be
punished as follows:
(1) With an imprisonment for a term of one year to three years
or with a fine of five thousand rupees to twenty five
thousand rupees, in case of the cultivation of twenty five
plants.
(2) With an imprisonment for a term from three years to ten
years and with a fine from twenty five thousand rupees to
two hundred thousand rupees in case of cultivation of
more than twenty five plants.
Anyone who commits any other prohibited acts other than
consumption of opium, coca, or any other narcotic drugs made
therefrom and cultivation of such plants shall be punished as
follows:
(1) With an imprisonment for a term from five years to ten
years and with a fine from five thousand rupees to twenty
five thousand rupees for anyone doing transaction upto
twenty five grams.
(2) With an imprisonment for a term from ten years to fifteen
years and with a fine from seventy thousand rupees to two
hundred thousand rupees for anyone doing transaction
from twenty five grams to hundred grams.
(3) With an imprisonment for a term from fifteen years to life
imprisonment and with a fine from five hundred thousand
rupees to twenty five hundred thousand for anyone doing
transaction of any quantity more than one hundred grams.
(h) Anyone who addicts any natural or synthetic narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances and their salt and other substances, as
specified by Government of Nepal by a notification published in
the Nepal Gazette, from time to time, shall be punished with an
imprisonment for a term upto two months and with a fine upto
two thousand rupees or both.
Provided that, in case of a person who is in the
responsibility of any person or institution who have made bond
for doing treatment upto three months in the treatment centre, the
judicial authority may not punish such person on the condition of
submitting the information of treatment forthrightly from the
treatment centre.
(i) with an imprisonment for a term from two years to ten years and
with a fine from one hundred thousand rupees to twenty hundred
thousand rupees for anyone who commits any other prohibited
acts other than those mentioned in Clause (h) above.
Explanation : For the purpose of this section the term "gravity of
offence" shall mean the gravity of offence which shall be
determined on the basis of the nature of the narcotic drugs and its
quantity, store, purchase and sell, objective of the traffic in or
export-import, the organization or gang of the accused, weapons
used by the accused or use of force, involvement of minor made
in the offence, transaction done through the medium of institution
like education, social and cultural organisation and the transaction
made at the basis of abuse of post by a person holding a public
position.
Punishment for Permitting Prohibited Acts in ones Building, Land or
Vehicle: In case the owner of any building, land or vehicle or the person in
possession thereof willfully permits any act to be committed in any building,
land or vehicle as is prohibited under Section 4, he/she shall be punished with
an imprisonment for a term which may extend from six months to five years or
with a fine upto ten thousand rupees. If the owner of the building, land or
vehicle has committed such offence or has permitted to commit such offence,
such building, land or vehicle may be liable to confiscation.
16. Punishment for Repeated Offence : In case any person who had been
punished once under this Act again commits any other offence mentioned
hereunder, he/she shall be punished for each subsequent offence, in addition to
the prescribed punishment, with an imprisonment for a term which may extend
upto five years and with a fine upto one hundred thousand rupees.
17. Punishment for conspiracy, attempt, abetment and accomplice in an
offence : In case any person conspires or attempts to commit any offence
punishable under this Act, or abets others to commit such offence or is an
accomplice in such offence, he/she shall be liable to such punishment which shall
be half of the punishment due to the actual offender.
♣17A. Punishment for those doing transaction of other substances as if it was
narcotic drug : Any person or gang carrying out the acts of transaction
including sell distribution, export, import, store, production of other substances
giving belief as if it was narcotic drug, shall be liable to such punishment which
shall be half of the punishment due to the actual offender.
♣17B. Punishment for those not providing the particulars or documents related to
narcotic drugs : In course of collection of particulars of narcotic drugs, if any
particular or document is not provided by any person, organisation-institution
or association, demanded by the Narcotic Drugs Control Officer or
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by third Amendment.
investigating authority such person, organisation-institution or association shall
be liable to such punishment which shall be half of the punishment due to the
actual offender.
18. Confiscation of Materials Connected with the Offence : All narcotic drugs
connected with any offence punishable under this Act and all materials and
equipment used in the manufacture or production of such narcotic drugs shall
be confiscated and any vehicle used for the transportation of such narcotic
drugs, other than railway train and aeroplane, shall also be confiscated.
Provided that, no vehicle shall be confiscated if the owner of the vehicle
is able to prove that he/she was not aware of the fact that his/her vehicle would
be or had been used for committing such offence.
⊕18A. Property to be Confiscated : (1) All movable or immovable property earned
from doing any act in contravention of Clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of

Section 4 shall be confiscated.
(2) If the economic resource or the property of the person convicted of
any offence under Clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of Section 4 is not in
proportion of the known earning resource of the convicted person or his/her
family such property unless proved otherwise by him/her shall be deemed to
have been earned by the acts in contravention to this Act and shall be
confiscated even if it is registered on the name of the members of his/her family
or any other person.
(3) If there are reasonable grounds that anybody has committed offence
liable to be confiscating of property, then the judicial authority may withheld
the property of such person, if there is a written request from Narcotic Drugs
Control Officer to withheld his/her property.
18B. The informer is to be rewarded : Anyone who informs the Narcotic Drugs
Control Officer, of the transaction or use of narcotic drugs which leads to the
proving of offence and if the offender is punished and if there is imposition of
⊕ Inserted by Second Amendment.
 Amended by the third Amendment .
fine, the informer shall be provided twenty percent of the amount of fine as
reward. The name of person receiving such reward shall be held secret.
♣18C Punishment may be remitted : Notwithstanding anything contained in
prevailing laws, any person who helps in finding the principal offender and
assists by providing the information and clue about gang in which he/she,
him/herself engaged or other gang involved in the transaction of narcotic drug
punishable under this Act, if there is a demand for full or partial remission of
punishment in the charge-sheet, the judicial authority also may remit in
punishment accordingly.
♣18D. The employees to be rewarded : If anybody is punished with an imprisonment
and with a fine in the case of narcotic drugs by the judicial authority,
Government of Nepal may reward twenty percent of amount of such fine to the
employees involved in the narcotic drugs control and investigation activities.
♣18E Some amount of fine to be made available to the Treatment Centre : If any
person is punished with an imprisonment and with a fine in the narcotic drug
case, the treatment center shall be provided twenty percent amount of such fine.
If there are more than one treatment centre the Chief Narcotic Control Officer
shall distribute such amount of fine.
19. Power to withhold prosecution or remit punishment : If a person is found to
have purchased or possessed ♥cannabis/ marijuana or medicinal opium, without
commercial motive and in small quantity, or has consumed only small dose of
such drug and if he/she has committed such offence for the first time, the
Narcotic Drugs Control Officer may, after keeping a record of such person,
make him/her sign a bond undertaking not to commit such offence again and
release him/her after recording the reasons for withholding the prosecutions.
Even where the prosecution has already been started, the court may, if it deems
the offence to be of petty nature and if the accused has committed such offence
for the first time, after keeping a record of such person, make him/her sign a
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
♥ Amended by the First amendment .
bond undertaking not to commit such offence again and release him/her without
awarding any punishment.
∇19A. No Proceedings are to be Undertaken while Undergoing Treatment : (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Clauses (a) and (d) of Sub-section (1) of

Section 14, the narcotic drug consumer, while undergoing treatment or
rehabilitation in a treatment or rehabilitation center established or recognized
by Government of Nepal, shall not be subjected to the punishment under this
(2) The concerned officer shall prepare and keep a weekly or monthly
report in the format as prescribed by Government of Nepal by asking the details
of the treatment and rehabilitation from the concerned treatment and
rehabilitation centre regarding those persons who are undergoing treatments in
the centers as mentioned in Sub-section (1).
20. Special provision as to stocks of narcotic drugs under previous license : If,
at the time of commencement of this Act, any stock of narcotic drug is left with
any person holding a license pursuant to Intoxicating substance Act, 1961 and
Intoxicating Substance Rules, 1962, he/she shall have to surrender such stock of
narcotic drugs to the Narcotic Drugs Control Officer within the prescribed time
limit.
21. Provision regarding to Narcotic Drugs Control Officer and Narcotic Drugs
Control Administration : (1) Government of Nepal shall establish a Narcotic
Drugs Control Administration under the ∂Ministry of Home Affairs for carrying
out the objectives of this Act and may ♥appoint or designate a Chief Narcotic
Drugs Control Officer, one or more Narcotic Drugs Control Officers, Deputy
Narcotic Drugs Control Officer and other officers as and when necessary.
(2) The Chief Narcotic Drugs Control Officer shall act as a chief of the
Narcotic Drugs Control Administration established under Sub-section (1) and
∇ Inserted by First Amendment.
∂ Amended by Some Nepal Act Amendment Act, 2048.
♥ Amended by the First amendment.
 Amended by the third Amendment.
the Chief Narcotic Drugs Control Officer shall supervise control, direct and
coordinate the measures relating to control of narcotic drugs under this Act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in other provisions of this Act, if
it is established that any Government employee has taken bribe with a view to
assist a person facilating the sale and use of narcotic drugs, penalty shall be
imposed on such employee under the prevailing law and an additional penalty
equivalent to the half of the penalty given to such offender involved in due sale
and use of narcotic drugs.
∇21A. Judicial Authority and Appeal : (1) The court of law as shall be constituted or
prescribed by Government of Nepal by publishing a notification in the Nepal
Gazette shall have the authority to hear the cases under this Act except those
cases which are related to the offence under Clause (a) of Section 4.
(2) The court of law as mentioned in Sub-section (1) shall, while
adjudicating cases under this Act, adopt the procedures and use the authority as
has been laid down in Special Court Act, 2059.
(3) The person who is not satisfied on the decision or the final order of
the court under Sub-section (1) may make an appeal to the Appellate Court.
♣21B. Functions, Powers and Duties of the Investigating Authority : (1) The
investigating authority while being deputed in the control of narcotic drugs
shall enjoy the powers equal to that of police pursuant to prevailing laws in
course of conducting investigation of narcotic drugs.
(2) While conducting investigation in the transaction of narcotic drugs
the investigating authority shall enjoy the powers equal to that of custom officer
pursuant to prevailing Custom Act to search the goods of the person seen
doubtful in the transaction of narcotic drugs.
Provided that, before conducting such search, the investigating authority
shall have to issue a search warrant to the concerned person.
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .
 At present the special court Act,2059
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
(3) The investigating authority shall enjoy the powers equal to that of
postal officer pursuant to prevailing Postal Act, to censor any matter to be
received by post which is seen doubtful in course of investigation of narcotic
drugs.
♣21C. The Scientific equipments and weapons may be taken : The authority and
employees to be engaged in the investigating function of narcotic drugs and the
employees related to narcotic drug control shall have the powers to carry and
use scientific equipment, communication devices and weapons and the material
to be used in that weapon, which are necessary in course of investigation and
control activities.
22. Government to be a plaintiff : Government of Nepal shall be the plaintiff in
all cases under this Act and all such cases shall be deemed to have been
incorporated in Schedule 1 of the Government Cases Act,2049 (1992).
22A. .⊗.....
♣22B. No punishment for the works done in good faith : No case shall be instituted
or legal action be taken against any government employee in relation to any
function performed or attempted to perform in good faith under this Act.
♣22C. Provision in relation to extension of time : The judicial authority may grant
extension of time upto three months, not exceeding one month at a time, for
keeping the persons in police custody, who have been arrested in course of
investigation of narcotic drugs.
23. Provision Regarding Cases Filed Before the Commencement of this Act :
Cases Pertaining to narcotic drugs which are already filed or to be filed under
any Nepal law existing before the commencement of this Act shall be disposed
of by the same authority as empowered to hear such cases under those law.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
 At present the Government Cases Act, 2049 (1992)
⊗ Inserted by First Amendment and deleted by second amendment.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
♣ Inserted by the third Amendment.
∇23A. Prevailing Law is to be Applicable : Notwithstanding anything contained in
other provisions of this Act, the production, sale and distribution, exportimport, store and consumption of medicines made in pharmacutical forms such
as tablets, capsules, injections of the name and quantum as prescribed in the
Pharmacopia regarding the natural or synthetic narcotic or psychotropic
substances and their salt as prescribed pursuant to Sub-clause (7) of Clause (a)
of Section 3, shall be governed by the Medicine Act, 2035.
Provided that, the production sale and distribution, export-import, store
and consumption of the raw materials (raw or chemicalized) of the narcotic or
psychotrophic substances shall be governed by this Act."
24. Power to frame Rules or issue orders : Government of Nepal may frame Rules
or issue orders to carry out the objectives of this Act.
25. Repeal : The Intoxicating Substance Act, 2017 (1961) and the Intoxicating
Substance Rules, 2019 (1962) are hereby repealed.
Note: The Section 12 of Narcotic Drugs (Control) (First Amendment) Act, 2043
is a follows:
Cases to be Transferred: The cases relating to the offence under Clause (a) of

Section 4 which have been filed in any court and is under the proceeding before
the commencement of this Act shall be transferred to the district court whereas
other cases under this Act shall be transferred to the court under Sub-section (1)
of Section 21A.
∇ Inserted by First Amendment .

===== SOURCE: National-Civil-Code(2074).pdf =====

The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074)
Table of Contents
Contents

Part-1
Preliminary

Chapter-1
Preliminary Statements

Chapter-2
General Principles of Civil Law

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Civil Rights

Part-2
Law Relating to Persons

Chapter-1
Provisions Relating to Natural Persons

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Legal Persons

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Bankruptcy of Natural Persons

Part-3
Family Law

Chapter-1
Provisions Relating to Marriage

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Consequences of Marriage

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Divorce

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Relationship of Parents and
Children

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Maternal and Paternal Authority

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Guardianship

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Curatorship

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Adoption

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Inter-country Adoption

Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Partition

Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Succession

Part-4
Law Relating to Property

Chapter-1
General Provisions Relating to Property

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Ownership and Possession

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Use of Property

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Cultivation, Possession and
Registration of Land

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Government, Public and
Community Property

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Trusts

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Usufruct

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Servitudes

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to House Rent

Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Gift and Donation

Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Transfer and Acquisition of
Property

Chapter-12 Provisions Relating to Mortgage of Immovable
Property

Chapter-13 Provisions Relating to Pre-emption of Immovable
Property

Chapter-14 Provisions Relating to Registration of Deeds

Chapter-15 Provisions Relating to Transactions

Part-5
Provisions Relating to Contracts and Other
Liabilities

Chapter-1
Provisions Relating to Obligations

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Formation of Contracts

Chapter-3
Validity of Contracts

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Performance of Contracts

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Breach of Contracts and
Remedies

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Sales of Goods

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Guarantee

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Bailment

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Pledge or Deposit

Chapter-10 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Agency

Chapter-11 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Carriage of Goods

Chapter-12 Provisions Relating to Contracts of Lease

Chapter-13 Provisions Relating to Hire-purchase Contracts

Chapter-14 Provisions Relating to Wages

Chapter-15 Provisions Relating to Indirect or Quasi-Contracts

Chapter-16 Provisions Relating to Unjust Enrichment

Chapter-17 Provisions Relating to Torts

Chapter-18 Provisions Relating to Liability for Defective Products

Part-6 Provisions Relating to Private International Law
The National Civil (Code) Act, 2017 (2074)
Date of Authentication:
16 October 2017
Act Number 34 of the year 2017
An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Civil Laws
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make timely the civil provisions
contained in the Country Code and other laws, by also amending and
consolidating such provisions, in order to maintain morality, decency,
etiquette and convenience as well as economic interest of the public by
maintaining law and order in the country and maintain harmonious
relationship between various castes, races and communities, by making just
provisions in the economic, social and cultural fields;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament under clause (1) of

Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

Part-1
Preliminary

Chapter-1
General Provisions
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"National Civil (Code), 2017".
(2) It shall come into force on 17 August 2018 (first day of the
month of Bhadra of the year 2075).
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Act,-
“court” means the Supreme Court, High Court or
District Court, and this term includes a court, other
judicial body or authority authorized by law to proceed
and adjudicate any specific type of civil cases,
"law" means a law in force for the time being,
"person" means a natural person and this term includes
a legal person,
"law-suit" means a statement of claims, and this term
includes any other kind of complaint, claim,
counterclaim or equivalent petition,
“minor” means a child who has not attained eighteen
years of age,
"Local
Level"
means
Rural
Municipality
(Gownpalika) or Municipality,
"property" means any movable or immovable property,
"heir" means a person who is in the order of priority
for succession pursuant to Section 239.
Not to prejudice special legal provisions: Where a law in force
provides a separate provision in any matter regulated by this Act,
no provision of this Act shall affect such a matter.

Chapter - 2
General Principles of Civil Law
Principles and provisions applicable generally: The principles
and provisions referred to in this Chapter shall generally be
applicable to the matters of civil law.
Ignorance of law not to be excused: The ignorance of law shall
not be excused. Every one shall be presumed to have the knowledge
of law.
Act against public interest not to be carried out: No one may
carry out any act in such a manner so that it may be against public
interest.
Act contrary to law to be invalid: Any act contrary to law shall be
invalid.
A wrongdoer to bear liability for loss or damage: (1) A
person
who causes loss or damage to another person by committing a
wrong while doing, or causing to be done any act shall bear the
liability for such loss or damage.
Every person shall himself or herself bear the
consequences of any wrongful act committed by him or her.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Act or law, the
concerned person shall bear compensation to perform the liability
referred to in sub-section (1).
Determination of the Compensation shall be as
provided for in the law.
Act causing nuisance to other not to be done: No person shall do,
or cause to be done, any act that causes nuisance, annoyance or
damage to prestige, reputation or property of another person.
10. Not to enjoy benefit of wrong: No person shall be entitled to enjoy
benefit accrued from his or her own wrong.
Act against interest to be invalid: Any act done against the
interest of a person who is under one's own guardianship,
curatorship, subjection or influence or likely be under influence
shall be invalid.
Personality to be recognized: Every person shall recognize other
person's personality.
Good neighborhood to be maintained: Every person shall
maintain so good neighborhood as not to cause damage, loss to the
community or neighbors of his or her residence.
Not to be relieved from civil liability: No person shall be relieved
from a civil liability under the law merely on the ground that the
proceeding of criminal offense is initiated or not initiated against
him or her.
Custom or tradition contrary to law not to be recognized: No
custom or tradition contrary to law shall be recognized in the
dispensation of justice.
Applicable to foreigners as well: Except in cases where the
subject, context or nature requires application of any legal provision
only to a Nepali citizen, this Act or other provisions concerning
civil law shall be equally applicable to a foreigner as well.

Chapter - 3
Provisions Relating To Civil Rights
To be equal before law: (1) Every citizen shall be equal before
No citizen shall be deprived of equal protection of law.
Discrimination not to be made: (1) No discrimination shall be
made in the application of general law on grounds of origin,
religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical condition, disability,
condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic condition,
language, region, ideological conviction or on similar other ground.
No person shall discriminated in any public and private
place on grounds of origin, religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical
condition, disability, condition of health, marital status, pregnancy,
economic condition, language, region, ideological conviction or on
similar other ground; and no person shall, on such ground, be
prevented from using service, amenities or utilities of public use or
from entering into a public place or public religious place or from
performing religious act according to his or her will.
No person shall be discriminated on ground of sex with
regard to remuneration and social security for the same work.
In appointing any citizen to a governmental or public
office, he or she shall be appointed only on the basis of the
qualifications determined by the law. In so appointing, no citizen
shall be discriminated on grounds of origin, religion, color, caste,
race, sex, physical condition, disability, condition of health, marital
status,
pregnancy,
economic
condition,
language,
region,
ideological conviction or similar other ground.
Discrimination not to be deemed where special provision is
made: Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 17 and 18,
any special provision made by law for the protection, empowerment
or development of the citizens that are socially or culturally
backward women, dalit, indigenous, indigenous nationalities,
Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims, oppressed class, backward class,
minorities, marginalized, peasants, workers, youths, children, senior
citizens, gender and sexual minorities, persons with disabilities,
pregnant women, the incompetent or helpless, backward region and
also economically indigent Khash Arya shall not be considered to
be a discrimination.
Guarantee of freedoms and rights: (1) No person shall be
deprived of personal liberty except in accordance with law.
Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the following
freedoms and rights:
To express one’s opinion and expression,
To assemble, hold assembly, conference peacefully
without arms,
To form union and association,
To move and reside in any part of Nepal,
To practice any profession, employment, industry,
business,
To obtain education of his or her choice or in his or
her mother tongue,
To earn, use, transfer property and carry out any
other transaction of property,
To profess and practice his or her religion practiced
from time immemorial, subject to the compliance of
public morality and traditions,
To preserve and promote the language, script or
culture of his or her community,
To operate a religious place and religious trust, by
maintaining independent existence of his or her
religious community,
To protect or maintain privacy of his or her body,
residence, property, document, correspondence or
information.
Right to privacy deemed to be violated: (1) If any person
commits, save in accordance with law, any of the following acts
without obtaining consent of the concerned person, he or she shall
be deemed to have violated the right to privacy:
Entry into any person’s residence,
Opening a person's correspondence or using it,
taping or recording or listening the discourse,
speech, sound through the medium of telephone or
other technology,
Watching,
publishing,
broadcasting
disseminating activities, behaviors of personal life
of a person,
Taking figure or photograph of a person,
Imitating other's name, figure, photograph, sound
and making the same public.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) or (e)
of sub-section (1), if a person commits any act referred to in the
said clauses for literary or artistic purpose or public interest, the
right to privacy shall not be deemed to have been violated.
Right to make contract: Every citizen shall have the right to make
a contract subject to the law.
No taxation except in accordance with law: No tax shall be levied
on and collected from a person’s property or income save in
accordance with law.
Not to employ in work against will: No person shall be employed
in a work against his or her will.
Property not to be acquired, requisitioned, auctioned or
forfeited: (1) The State shall not acquire, requisition, or otherwise
create any right in, the property of anyone, except in accordance
with law for the purpose of public interest.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to a property
earned illegally.
No property of anyone shall be auctioned or forfeited
except in accordance with law.
Complaint may be filed: (1) A person who is arrested or detained
or any one on his or her behalf may file a petition in the Supreme
Court, High Court or District Court for the writ of habeas corpus.
If a person files a petition in more than one court, the
petition filed in the higher court shall be maintained.
If a person commit or there is sufficient suspicion that
he or she is going to commit any act in contravention of this
Chapter, the person aggrieved from such an act may, for the
enforcement of his or her right, file a petition in the High Court or
District Court having territorial jurisdiction.
If it is found from inquiry into the petition filed
pursuant to sub-section (1) that the person has been arrested or
detained against law, the concerned court shall order to release him
or her immediately.
If it is found from inquiry in respect of the petition
filed pursuant to sub-section (3) that the respondent has caused
some damage or is about to cause damage to the petitioner's right,
the concerned court may issue an order requiring the respondent to
refrain from committing, or causing to be committed, any act
damaging the petitioner’s right, and where some act has already
been committed, from committing, or causing to be committed, the
remaining act, or to do any act.
Compensation to be awarded: (1) If, from the examination of the
complaint filed pursuant to Section 26, the respondent is found to
have maliciously committed any act causing damage to the
complainant, the concerned court shall, having regard to the
circumstances,
order
respondent
reasonable
compensation to the complainant.
If an official or employee working in a governmental
or public body is held to have knowingly violated the civil rights
referred to in this Chapter, such an official or employee shall
personally bear the amount of compensation referred to in subsection (1).
Compensation for filing false complaint: (1) If a person is held to
have filed a complaint with the intention of knowingly causing pain
or loss or damage to a person, the concerned court shall order the
person so filing the false complaint to pay a reasonable
compensation to the respondent.
The compensation to be awarded under sub-section (1)
shall include the costs incurred by the respondent for defense before
the court, court fees and legal practitioner's cost.
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit any time in the
case of arrest or detention, and within a period of six months after
the date on which such an act or action was done or taken, in the
other cases.

Part - 2
Law Relating to Persons
Chapter – 1
Provisions Relating to Natural Persons
To be recognized as person: Every person shall, immediately after
birth, be recognized as a person and be entitled to exercise rights
under law until he or she survives.
Right to Name: (1) Every person shall, immediately after birth,
have right to name and be entitled to use the given name
respectfully.
Every person shall have the right to defend his or her
name, reputation and prestige and such right shall not be
transferable to others.
No person shall be allowed to abuse another’s name.
To attain competency: (1) Every person who attains eighteen
years of age shall be considered to become a major, and shall, in the
same capacity, be considered to be legally competent.
A person who is competent under sub-section (1) may,
subject to law, exercise, bear and discharge any right, obligation
and duty whatsoever.
To be considered incompetent: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 32, a person who has not attained ten years of
age, or even if attained that age, is unable to protect his or her right
and interest for the reason of unsoundness of mind shall be
considered to be legally incompetent.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term
"unsoundness of mind" means the condition of being incapable, due
to physical and mental ill health, of knowing the act done by
oneself in general understanding and consequences thereof.
An incompetent person does not have to bear any type
of legal obligation, and while exercising a right, it has to be
exercised, or cause to be exercised, only with the consent of the
guardian or curator or through the guardian or curator, as the case
may be.
In executing a document on behalf of an incompetent
person, it shall be executed, or caused to be executed, through his or
her guardian or curator, as the case may be.
To be considered quasi-competent: (1) A person who has
attained ten years of age but not completed eighteen years of age
shall be considered as a quasi-competent person.
A quasi-competent person may, subject to law,
exercise, bear and discharge any right, obligation and duty
whatsoever.
A quasi-competent person shall, in exercising a right,
obtain the consent of the guardian or curator or exercise the right
through the guardian or curator, as the case may be.
In executing a document by a quasi-competent person,
it shall be executed in the presence of his or her guardian or curator,
as the case may be.
To be according to court decision: If a dispute arises about a
person's competency, incompetency or quasi-competency, it shall
be settled according to the decision of the court.
Physical examination or change of organ may be made: (1) Any
person may, subject to law, get his or her body examined, treated or
transplanted or collected any organ or part or a sample of his or her
body.
If a person is so incapable that he or she cannot express
his or her consent, his or her guardian or curator, as the case may be,
for the interest of such a person, carry out, or cause to be carried out,
the act referred to in sub-section (1).
Power to specify method of one’s cremation, obsequies rites or
funereal acts: (1) Any person may, while he or she is alive, specify
the manner of cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts to be
carried out after his or her death.
If a person has specified the manner of cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal acts pursuant to sub-section (1), his or
her successor shall carry out his or her cremation, obsequies rites or
funereal acts accordingly.
If a person has not specified the manner of his or her
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts pursuant to sub-section
(1), his or her successor shall conduct such person's cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal acts according to the prevailing custom
and tradition.
Power to donate corpse or organ: (1) Any person may express in
writing his or her will to donate, after his or her death, his or her
corpse or any organ of body or any part thereof to a person for the
purpose of using, or causing to be used, such corpse or organ for a
particular work.
If a person has expressed his or her will pursuant to
sub-section (1), his or her successor shall use the deceased’s corpse,
part of the body or a portion thereof according to the will of the
deceased.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if the person accepting such corpse, organ or any part thereof is not
available or if it is not possible to detach such corpse, organ or any
part thereof, cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts of such
corpse shall be conducted pursuant to Section 37.
To be considered address of residence: (1) If a person's address of
residence needs to be determined, the address given by him or her
for that purpose, where he or she has so given, and if not so given,
the place of his or her permanent residence within Nepal shall be
considered to be the address of his or her residence.
If a person does not have residence or his or her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-section (1), the place of
his or her abode for the time being shall be considered to be the
address of his or her residence.
If a person does not have a residence or his or her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) and the
person has carried on any trade, business, employment or
transaction, the place where he or she has so carried on trade,
business, employment or transaction shall be considered to be the
address of his or her residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
(2) or (3), where the address of a person's residence is changed, the
place where he or she is residing for the time being shall be
considered to be the address of his or her residence.
If the residence of an incompetent or quasi-competent
person needs to be determined, the place of his or her permanent
residence and if such place is not traced out, the place where his or
her guardian or curator resides shall be considered to be the address
of his or her residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a person considers any address as the place of his or her
residence for a particular purpose, such a place shall be considered
to be the address of his or her residence.
Presumed to be dead: (1) If a person misars without any notice for
a period of consecutive twelve years or if a person for whom it is
natural to have information about such disappeared person has not
received any information about him or her for the last twelve years,
such a person shall, except in cases where an evidence establishing
that he or she is alive is received, be deemed to be dead.
Provided that in the following circumstance, such a person
shall be deemed to have died after the completion of the following
period:
In the case of a person having attained eighty
years of age, five years,
In the case of a soldier deputed to war-field, four
years after the cessation of the war;
In the case of a person traveling by an aircraft,
ship or other vehicle that met with an accident,
three years after the date of such accident.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of
the proviso to sub-section (1), if a person dies in an accident and
there is no evidence of another person meeting with the same
accident to remain alive, such a person also shall be deemed to have
died at the same time.
Where more than one person are dead at one and the
same time in an accident, each person so died is deemed, except as
otherwise proved, to have been died at the same time.
Provided that where, for a particular purpose, a question that
which of the persons died first in such an accident requires to be
settled, the person who was older by age at the time of death shall,
unless otherwise proved, be deemed to have been died first.
If the concerned person files a petition stating that any
person has disappeared without a notice or died due to a disaster or
accident and requests for a judicial declaration on such person's
death, disclosing therewith the date, place, cause of death and basis
thereof, the court may, after examining the evidence, make an order
of judicial declaration on the death of such a person.
If a person already declared dead pursuant to subsection (4) comes back alive and files a petition in person to get the
judicial declaration made earlier to be annulled or if his or her
successor files a petition for amendment to the previous judicial
declaration on death for the reason that the date of death of such
deceased happened to be different than the date referred to in the
judicial declaration, the court shall, having examined into this
matter, annul or amend the judicial declaration made pursuant to
sub-section (4).
Provided that-
Where a living wife has concluded another
marriage after such declaration, the matrimonial
relationship with the person declared to be dead
cannot be re-established.
There shall be no adverse effect on the legal
right of the person declared to be dead.
The act that has already been carried out
pursuant to the previous judicial declaration shall
not be prejudiced by virtue of the establishment
of a new date of death.
The right, interest or concern of the person
provided by law shall not be affected by any act
done or action taken pursuant to clause (3).
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as follows:
In the case of the circumstance referred to in Section
36, within three months after the date on which such
act was done or action taken,
In the case of the circumstance referred to in subsection (5) of Section 40, within one year after the date
of knowledge of such an act or action,
In any circumstance other than that referred to in
clauses (a) and (b), within six months after the date on
which such an act was done or action taken.

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Legal Persons
Legal person to acquire competency: (1) A body corporate
incorporated pursuant to law shall obtain legal personality, and
obtain legal competency in the same capacity.
In order to obtain legal competency pursuant to subsection (1), any body shall be registered in accordance with law.
Except where a separate provision has been made by
law for registration pursuant to sub-section (2), an application shall
be made to the competent authority, setting out the following
matters:
Name of the body corporate,
Head office of the body corporate, and address of
such office,
Objectives and functions of the body corporate,
Details of the capital structure, if any, of the body
corporate,
Other necessary details.
After the registration of a body corporate pursuant to
sub-section (2), such a body shall be deemed to have been
incorporated.
A legal person shall have a corporate personality and
use a separate seal for its activities.
A body incorporated pursuant to this Section shall be
an autonomous and body corporate with perpetual succession, and
may, in the same capacity, subject to law, carry out as a person the
following functions:
To acquire, hold, earn, possess, dispose off, sell or
otherwise manage a property,
To execute a contract, exercise rights and discharge
obligations under the contract or to assume any kind
of right or obligation in any other way,
To frame statute or bye-laws required to operate its
own functions, proceedings or business,
To appoint necessary employees based on law to
carry out its functions,
Provided that the commissions, institutions or
bodies referred to in clause (g) of Section 44 shall
not be allowed to appoint employees.
To open branches or other offices, subject to its
statute and bye-laws,
To open an account in a bank or financial institution
and to operate the account,
To carry out other functions according to law.
A legal person may sue or initiate other legal action
and may also be sued or subjected to other legal action by its name.
To obtain legal competency upon incorporation: (1) A legal
person shall, upon its incorporation, obtain legal competency to
carry out civil and commercial acts and transactions, in addition to
the acts mentioned in Section 42.
The legal competency obtained pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall continue to exist until the legal person is liquidated,
dissolved or wounded up in accordance with law.
Legal competency deemed to be acquired, ipso facto:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 42, the following
body, as a legal person, shall be deemed to have, ipso facto,
obtained competency:
The State of Nepal,
The Government of Nepal,
The Federal Parliament or Legislature-Parliament,
A court, constitutional body or any office
thereunder,
Ministry,
Secretariat,
Department
Government of Nepal and any other government
office,
A Province,
The Province Government or Provincial level
Government offices,
A Provincial Assembly,
A Rural Municipality, Municipality or District
Assembly or Local Level government office under
such a body,
A commission, committee or similar other body set
up in accordance with law by the Government of
Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level
Government,
A corporation, corporate body or body set up in
accordance with law,
Any organization established for public purpose
such as a shrine, temple, deity place, Chaitya,
monastery, mosque, church, public rest house,
public inn, and graveyard remained in operation
from the time immemorial and in possession of a
property,
A community school, college or university
established for public purpose.
Address of location of legal person: The address of location of a
legal person shall be as specified at the time of incorporation of the
body corporate, and where such address is not so specified, the
address where its headquarters or registered office is located and
where such office or address also is not specified, the address where
the main administrative office or transaction and business of such a
body corporate is located shall be considered to be its address of
location.
Management and operation of legal person: (1) A legal person
shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be managed and
operated in accordance with the provisions set forth in the statute of
such a person, and where such provisions is not made, it shall be
managed and operated by one or more directors.
The legal person shall be responsible for the
management and operation made by the director or directors
pursuant to sub-section (1).
Operation of business of legal person: (1) In operating business
on behalf of a legal person, the business shall, except as otherwise
provided by law, be operated by the decision of directors of such a
person.
In operating business pursuant to sub-section (1), the
director may delegate powers to any director or other person to
operate any business.
Right or liability to devolve upon merger of legal person: (1) If a
legal person is, for any reason, merged with another legal person,
the right or liability of such person shall be as specified at the time
of such merger.
If not specified pursuant to sub-section (1), the right or
liability of the legal person to be merged shall devolve on the legal
person with which such a person is merged.
Legal person may become agent: A legal person may, subject to
law, act as an agent of any other person.
Not to participate in decision-making in case of conflict of
interest: (1) A member or director of any body or institution shall
not take part in the decision making process on a matter involving
his or her personal interest.
If a decision is affected by the conflict of interest under
sub-section (1), such a decision shall be void.
Legal person to be liable: If a loss or damage is caused to a person
from an act done and action taken by a person on behalf of a legal
person, such a legal person shall be liable and bear compensation
therefor.
Provided that if any loss is caused by doing an act beyond the
objective or competency of the legal person or dishonestly, the
director or a person doing such act shall personally be liable
therefor.
Assets or liability to be settled: If a legal person is dissolved for
any reason, the assets and liabilities of such a person shall be settled
in accordance with law.
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
months after the date of knowledge of such an act or action in the
cases of Section 50 and within six months after the date on which
such an act was done or action taken, in the other cases.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Bankruptcy of Natural Persons
Bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated: (1) If a person’s debts
and other liabilities to be borne by him or her exceed his or her
assets, bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated for payment or
recovery of debts or settlement of liabilities from such assets.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated in the following
circumstances:
If a person who has regular income or is certain to
earn income in the future proves that his or her
income can pay or set off debts or other liabilities in
a certain period or the creditor is satisfied in such
matter,
If a person likely to be a bankrupt asks for a period
of up to five years specifying the period of time to
repay the debts of creditors and sources thereof
from the date of origin of conditions necessitating
the commencement of bankruptcy proceedings in
order to enjoin or cause to be enjoined from
initiating that proceedings,
If the creditor does not agree to initiate, or cause to
be initiated, bankruptcy proceedings.
Explanation:
(1) For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"assets" means the concerned person's property
standing for the time being or to be earned or
likely to be earned up to the time prior to the
completion of bankruptcy proceedings pursuant
to this Chapter.
For the purposes of clause (c), the term
"creditor" means, where there are more than one
creditor, creditors or a group of creditors who
hold fifty percent or more debts out of the total
debts of the person likely to become bankrupt.
If a debt or claim of a creditor is settled from the assets
of a person under this Chapter, such a person shall be deemed to
become a bankrupt.
The court shall send the record of the person being
bankrupt
pursuant
sub-section
bankruptcy
administration office established for that purpose.
The bankruptcy administration office shall update the
records referred to in sub-section (4).
Any person declared bankrupt pursuant to sub-section
(3) shall not be required to repay debt or fulfill the obligation other
than the debt or obligation he or she has to pay or fulfill and settle
under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6),
the following obligation shall be fulfilled from the trade, business
or transaction he or she starts after his or her declaration of being
bankrupt:
Tax, fee or charge to be paid to the Government of
Nepal,
Province
Government
Local
Government
Amount of penalty or fine to be paid according to
the order of a court,
Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of
property of the person under his or her
guardianship or curatorship,
Amount to be paid for the goods stolen,
Amount to be paid for the embezzlement of
property of a trust.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any person becomes bankrupt, he or she may carry on
any trade, business or transaction other than any act or activity he
or she is prohibited from doing or taking in that capacity according
to law.
Petition to be filed to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) A
person who is likely to become a bankrupt may himself or herself,
or a creditor or group of creditors having claim of at least twentyfive percent or more of the total debts if the amount of debts is
disclosed and, if the amount of debts is not disclosed, a creditor or
group of creditors having claim of more than five hundred thousand
rupees borrowed by such a person, may file a petition in the court,
in order to initiate bankruptcy proceedings.
In filing a petition by a person likely to become a
bankrupt for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-section (1), the petition
shall specify the following details:
(a) Actual statement of his or her total assets and value
thereof,
(b) Statement of total amount of debts borrowed by
him or her, interest accrued thereon and details of
the creditor or creditors having lent such debts,
along with their addresses,
(c) If he or she has to discharge other liabilities, details
thereof,
(d) The reason for the failure to repay or discharge
debts and other liabilities.
In filing a petition by a creditor or group of creditors
for bankruptcy pursuant to sub-section (1), the petition shall specify
the following details:
Evidence indicating that the borrower is likely to
be a bankrupt,
Statement of the assets of the borrower and
approximate value thereof, to the extent of the
petitioner's knowledge,
Statement of the petitioner’s claim, and if the
petitioner has knowledge of other creditor's debt
or claim, such debt or claim,
Details including addresses of the creditors.
Prior to filing a petition pursuant to sub-section (1) to
initiate bankruptcy proceedings, a creditor or group of creditors
shall give a notice to the borrower indicating that the borrower shall
repay his or her debts or discharge other liabilities within a period
of at least three months and that in the event of failure to repay the
debts within that period, a petition shall be filed in the court to
initiate bankruptcy proceedings.
Notice to be given to creditor: (1) If a petition is filed by a
borrower pursuant to Section 55 to initiate bankruptcy proceedings,
the court shall issue a notice of thirty-five days and serve the same
on the creditor or group of creditors whose debts the borrower has
specified as due and payable and publish the notice in any national
daily newspaper.
The notice to be published pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall also contain a statement inviting any other person having any
type of claim, if any, over the assets of the person whose assets is
under bankruptcy proceedings to make a claim with evidence
within the time-limit as specified in the same sub-section.
The claim made within the time-limit referred to in
sub-section (1) or (2) by the creditor or group of creditors or by
other person shall be considered to be the final claim made against
the assets of the borrower, and the bankruptcy proceedings of his or
her assets shall commence on the same basis.
Notice to be given to borrower: (1) If a petition is filed by a
creditor or group of creditors pursuant to Section 55 to initiate the
bankruptcy proceedings of the assets of the borrower, the court
shall serve a notice, along with a time-limit of thirty-five days, on
the borrower to appear before the court, along with a reply whether
or not the bankruptcy proceedings require to be instituted, and if
there exists any ground for not instituting the bankruptcy
proceedings, and evidence thereof.
If a notice is served on the borrower pursuant to subsection (1), a notice shall be given to the other creditor or claimant
to submit a claim in that respect within a period of thirty-five days
and such a notice shall be published in any national daily
newspaper.
The claim of a person who fails to submit a claim
within the period referred to in sub-section (2) shall not be valid
after that period.
The fee to be incurred in publishing a notice in a
national daily newspaper pursuant to sub-section (2) or sub-section
(1) of Section 56 shall be recovered from the concerned petitioner.
The fee recovered pursuant to sub-section (4) may be
awarded to be paid by the debtor in the course of bankruptcy.
Order to be given to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) If a
petition is filed in the court pursuant to Section 55 to initiate the
bankruptcy proceedings, the court shall make order as to whether it
would be appropriate to initiate the bankruptcy proceedings in
respect of that petition or not.
If an order is made to initiate the bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall, at the
request of the person likely to become bankrupt himself or herself
or of the creditor, order any other family member of such a person
to maintain status quo of the assets of the person in respect of
whose assets the bankruptcy proceedings are to commence, for the
purpose of bankruptcy.
If the court thinks that the assets of the person likely to
be bankrupt may be embezzled or may not be properly managed if
such a person or his or her family member is allowed to manage the
assets, the court may, on the basis of the petition by the party or suo
motu, entrust the responsibility for management of such assets to
any of the following persons:
(a) A person licensed as bankruptcy professional
pursuant to law,
(b) A bankruptcy trustee appointed pursuant to law,
(c) The concerned ward committee of the Local Level,
(d) Such an officer employee of the court or law
practitioner as designated by the court.
The Local Level, trustee or person designated pursuant
to sub-section (3) shall manage the assets of the person likely to
become bankrupt, in accordance with the order of the court.
Transaction to be, ipso facto, stayed or void: (1) If a court makes
an order, pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 58, to initiate the
bankruptcy proceedings in relation to the assets of a person, any of
the following acts cannot be carried out after the making of such an
order, and if any of such acts has already commenced or is being
carried out but not completed, such act shall, ipso facto, be stayed:
To transfer in any manner to any person the title to,
bail, pledge, mortgage or to lease or rent in any
manner for a period exceeding one year, the assets
of a person who is likely to become bankrupt,
To attach, or execute the pledge, mortgage of, the
assets of the person likely to become bankrupt
pursuant to the judgment of a court,
To repay debt or discharge liability of any creditor
from the assets of the person likely to be bankrupt.
Any deed, contract, dealing, transaction or arrangement
executed in contravention of the provision set forth in sub-section
(1) shall, ipso facto be deemed to have been void.
Opportunity to be provided to reconcile sum of debts: (1) If the
court has made an order to commence the bankruptcy proceedings
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 58, the Local Level, trustee or
person, as the case may be entrusted with responsibility to manage
property pursuant to sub-section (3) of the same Section shall, after
the assets, debts and other liabilities of the borrower are ascertained,
call a meeting of the debtors, creditors or other claimants.
In the meeting called pursuant to sub-section (1), the
creditor or claimant shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity
to waive his or her claim wholly or partly from all or any of the
assets of the borrower or to reconcile sum by taking amount lesser
than his or her claim, by mutual understanding between the person
likely to become bankrupt and the creditor or other claimant.
In making reconciliation of sum pursuant to subsection (2), an arrangement may be so made that a creditor pays the
debt or claim of some or most creditors and submits a lump sum
claim against such a person.
If the parties reach mutual understanding pursuant to
sub-section (2) or (3) or the concerned parties agree, for any
reasons, to stay the bankruptcy proceedings for the time being, a
joint petition may be filed in the court accordingly.
If a petition is filed for staying the bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-section (4), the court shall make an
order to stay as requested the bankruptcy proceedings for a period
not exceeding the period set forth in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of

Section 54.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (5), the
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the assets of such a person
cannot be instituted until the expiry of that period.
Priority order of paying debt or liability: (1) In carrying out or
causing to be carried out the bankruptcy proceedings of the assets
of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the debts to be paid or
liabilities to be discharged by such a person shall be settled, on the
basis of the following priority order, from the assets of such a
person:
Costs incurred in the carrying out of the bankruptcy
proceedings,
The liability of the secured creditor, who has
provided debt against a pledge or mortgage, to the
extent of such pledge or mortgage,
Tax, fine to be paid to the Government of Nepal,
Province Government or Local Government or
other government charges and dues,
Debts of the creditors other than those referred to in
clause (b),
Claim of the claimants other than those referred to
in clause (b), (c) or (d).
In paying or setting off debts or liabilities pursuant to
sub-section (1), if there are more than one creditor or claimant of
the same priority order, the debt or claim shall be paid or set off pro
rata basis from the assets bankrupted in proportion to the debt or
claim of each creditor or claimant.
(3) In paying the debts of the secured creditors pursuant to
clause (b) of sub-section (1), if, after recovery of his or her debts
from the assets pledged or mortgaged to him or her, there remains
any portion or sum of such pledge or mortgage, other creditors or
claimants may make claim over such portion or sum.
Provided that if the secured creditor's debts cannot be fully
recovered from such assets, he or she cannot claim other property.
Debt of creditor who shows excess debt not to receive priority:
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section
61, if it is held that, by a collusion between a person likely to
become a bankrupt and any creditor, and being guided by a
malafide motive to cause loss to another creditor or claimant, more
debts or claims have been shown from any transaction which has
never happened nor been carried on, the debt or liability of such a
creditor shall be paid or set off only after the debt or liability of
other creditor or claimant is satisfied.
Property to be set aside: (1) Prior to effecting bankruptcy of the
assets of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the following property
shall be set aside and the bankruptcy proceedings shall be carried
out from the remaining assets:
Any property that remains as the personal property
of a person other than one who is likely to become
a bankrupt,
Clothes up to three pairs and shoes up to three
pairs being worn or to be worn by the person who
is likely to become bankrupt and an undivided
family member of that person,
One set of cooking and dining utensils, pots and
cups, one set of bedding materials and reasonable
number of furniture required for the undivided
family member of the person likely to become a
bankrupt,
Medicines and health-related equipment required
to the person likely to become a bankrupt and the
undivided family member of that person,
Books necessary to carry out study and teaching,
Food necessary for subsistence for a period not
exceeding three months to the persons referred to
in clause (b),
One set of tools or instruments related to the
profession and employment of the persons referred
to in clause (b).
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b), (c),
(d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-section (1), the total value of the properties
referred to in these clauses shall not exceed one hundred thousand
rupees.
Assets not to be concealed: (1) A person who files a petition
pursuant to Section 55 for commencing the bankruptcy proceedings
of his or her assets shall submit an exact inventory of his or her
total assets.
In submitting an inventory pursuant to sub-section (1),
if he or she hides or conceals such assets with mala fide intention of
causing loss or damage to the creditor, a separate lawsuit may be
instituted against him or her.
If assets are hidden or concealed pursuant to subsection (1), and such assets are discovered before the completion of
the bankruptcy proceedings, the proceedings referred to in subsection (2) of Section 61 shall be carried out in respect of the
creditor and the claimant having so discovered the assets and the
other creditor and claimant as well.
If any creditor or claimant discovers any assets
pursuant to sub-section (3) after the completion of the bankruptcy
proceedings, ten percent amount of the assets so discovered shall be
provided to the creditor or claimant who has so discovered the
assets if such creditor or claimant has already satisfied the sum
according to his or her claim at the time of bankruptcy proceedings,
and if his or her claim has not been so satisfied, his or her sum shall
be caused to be satisfied from such assets and the remaining assets
shall be distributed pursuant to the said sub-section to the other
creditors and claimants.
Provided that if the creditor or claimant is the successor or
relative of the bankrupt person, he or she shall not be entitled to
such facility.
If the assets hidden or concealed pursuant to subsection (2) remain after payment to the creditor or claimant
pursuant to sub-section (4), such assets shall be returned to the
concerned person.
Status of bankruptcy to be terminated: (1) The status of a
bankrupt person falling under bankruptcy shall remain for a period
of twelve years from the date on which he or she became a bankrupt.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a bankrupt person pays all liabilities payable to the creditors at
the time of bankruptcy, he or she may file a petition in the court to
terminate the status of bankruptcy along with the evidence thereof.
The court shall make an order to summon the presence
of all creditors who were either partially paid or unpaid at the time
of bankruptcy of such a person within a period of fifteen days,
excluding the time required for journey, to have a hearing on the
petition filed pursuant to sub-section (2).
If, in hearing the petition filed pursuant to sub-section
(2), it appears that the bankrupt person has satisfied all the debts
and liabilities remained unpaid at the time of bankruptcy, the court
may annul the order made at the time of his or her bankruptcy.
If an order is annulled pursuant to sub-section (4), the
status of the bankrupt person shall be deemed have been terminated
after one year from the date of the annulment of such an order.
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit within the
following period from the date of accrual of the cause of action for
the commencement of the bankruptcy proceedings:
In matters under Section 54, within three years from
the date of accrual of the cause of action,
In matters under Sections 62 and 64, within two years
from the date of knowledge thereof,
In the matters other than those referred to in clauses (a)
and (b), within six months from the date of
commission of such an act or action.

Part-3
Family Law

Chapter-1
Provisions Relating to Marriage
Marriage deemed to be concluded: If a man and a woman accept
each other as the husband and wife through any occasion, ceremony,
formal or other act, a marriage shall be deemed to have been
concluded.
Marriage to be inviolable social bond: (1) Marriage shall be a
permanent, inviolable and holy social and legal bond, which is
based on free consent and established to start conjugal and family
life between a man and a woman.
The marital bond referred to in sub-section (1) shall
subsist until extinguished pursuant to Section 82.
Freedom of marriage: (1) Every person shall, subject to law, have
the freedom to conclude a marriage, establish a family and spend a
conjugal life.
A marriage must be made, or caused to be made, public
irrespective of the manner used to conclude it.
Every person's family life shall be inviolable.
Marriage may be concluded: (1) Subject to this Chapter, a
marriage may be concluded between a man and a woman on the
following conditions:
If the man and the woman agree to accept each
other as husband and wife,
If the man and the woman are not relatives,
punishable by law on incest,
If matrimonial relationship of both the man and the
woman does not exist,
If both have attained twenty years of age.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of
sub-section (1), nothing shall bar the conclusion, or causing the
conclusion of, a marriage within the relationship that is allowed to
marry in accordance with the practices prevailing in their ethnic
community or clan.
Marriage not to be concluded: (1) No one shall conclude, or cause
to be concluded, marriage with a man or a woman, as the case may
be, who is not in a condition where marriage can be concluded
pursuant to Section 70.
No one shall conclude, or cause to be concluded,
marriage with a man or a woman on any of the following conditions,
by way of misrepresentation:
One who has contracted human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) or Hepatitis 'B' or similar other
incurable severe disease,
One who has already been proved to have no sexual
organ, to be impotent or to have no reproductive
capability,
One who is dumb or has lost hearing capacity,
being fully blind or is suffering from leprosy,
One who is of unsound mind,
One who is already a married,
One who is a pregnant,
One who has been convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude by a court and sentenced
for the same.
A person who is aggrieved from the conclusion of
marriage by way of misrepresentation pursuant to sub-section (2)
may get such a marriage voided and claim a reasonable
compensation from the person who concludes, or causes to be
concluded, marriage by misrepresentation.
Marriage to be void: (1) A marriage concluded on any of the
following conditions shall, ipso facto, be void:
A marriage concluded without consent of the
man or the woman,
A marriage concluded between the relatives,
punishable by law on incest.
(c) Marriage against Section 70(1) (d).
(d) Another marriage concluded by a man or woman
whilst the current marital relationship is still
prevalent except in the situation of being
separated by taking partition according to law.
A marriage concluded pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
be invalid ab initio.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of
sub-section (1), a marriage concluded pursuant to sub-section (2) of

Section 70 shall not be void.
Voidable marriage: (1) If a marriage is concluded in any of the
following circumstances and any person who concludes such a
marriage does not accept it, the person may get such a marriage
voided:
Deleted
If the marriage has been concluded, or caused to be
concluded, by way of misrepresentation pursuant to
sub-section (2) of Section 71.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
a marriage shall be void only with the consent of the woman if she
is pregnant or has delivered a baby as the consequence of the
marriage.
Marriage to be deemed concluded if child is born from physical
intercourse: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2) of Section 69, if a woman is proved to have delivered a child by
conceiving pregnancy from physical intercourse with a man,
marriage between such a man and a woman shall, ipso facto, be
deemed to have been concluded.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no marriage shall be deemed to have been concluded between a
man and a woman in any of the following circumstances even if a
child is born from physical intercourse with the man:
If a woman gives birth to a child by conceiving
pregnancy as the consequence of rape,
Except in case of the relationship of under subsection (2) of Section 70, if a woman delivers a
child by conceiving pregnancy from a physical
intercourse with a man within the relationship
punishable by law on incest.
(c) If the age of marriage is not complete according to
part (d) of subsection 1 of section 70.
(d) If there is situation which causes polygamy.
No lawful rights of child already born to be prejudiced: There
shall be no prejudice in the lawful rights of a child already born
from a marriage if the marriage becomes void pursuant to Section
72 or the marriage is got voided pursuant to Section 73 or of the
child born in any of the circumstance referred to in sub-section (2)
of Section 74.
Marriage to be registered: (1) Both husband and wife shall get
their marriage registered by filing an application in the authority
appointed as per law.
Provided that in the circumstance referred to in sub-section
(1) of Section 74, both or either of husband and wife may file an
application for the registration of marriage.
A husband and wife residing outside Nepal may file an
application for the registration of marriage in the Nepali embassy or
consulate general located in the country in which they have been
residing.
If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2) for the registration of a marriage, the concerned authority shall,
after registering the marriage in the marriage book maintained in
the office, issue the marriage registration certificate, in the form
according to prevailing laws, to the applicant, within fifteen days of
the filing of the application.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"concerned authority" means the marriage registering authority.
If the marriage cannot be registered according to the
application filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the concerned
authority shall give the applicant information, specifying the
reasons therefor, within seven days of the filing of the application.
If any one party does not appear for the registration of
a marriage according to the application filed pursuant to the proviso
to sub-section (1), the concerned authority shall register the
marriage after inquiring into such a party.
If, in making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (5), the
other party expresses disagreement to the registration of marriage,
the concerned authority shall not register the marriage and inform
the applicant that the decision on that matter shall be made as
decided by the court.
The concerned authority shall safely maintain the
records of the details of the registration of marriage under this
Section.
If a couple who have already concluded marriage prior
to the commencement of this Act but have not registered the
marriage may, if they so desire, get their marriage registered
pursuant to this Section.
Provided that the marriage of such a couple shall not be
deemed to be legally invalid merely for the reason that such
marriage is not registered.
Marriage by registration: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (2) of Section 69 and Section 74, if a man and a
woman desire to conclude marriage by registration, they shall file
an application in the concerned District Court, if they are in Nepal,
and in the Nepali embassy or consulate general, if they are outside
Nepal, specifying therein their name, surname, age, address,
profession, name of their father, mother, grand-father, grand-mother,
whether previously married or not, if married, the details of the
dissolution of marriage and also the name of at least two witnesses.
In order to file an application pursuant to sub-section
(1), either the man or the woman or both must have resided since at
least fifteen days ago in the concerned district if the application has
to be filed in the District Court, and, if the application is to be filed
in the embassy or consulate general, in the country in which such an
embassy or a consulate general is situated.
Decision to be made as to whether marriage is capable of being
concluded: (1) If an application is filed pursuant to Section 77 for
the conclusion of a marriage by registration, the concerned
authority shall make, after making necessary inquiry, a decision
within seven days of the filing of the application, as to whether or
not the marriage is capable of being concluded.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the concerned authority based in a foreign country has suspicion
about the proposed marriage, the authority shall submit the matter
to the Government of Nepal and settle the matter according to the
decision of the Government of Nepal.
Deed of consent to be prepared: If a decision is made pursuant to

Section 78 to the effect that marriage is capable of being concluded
between the applicants, the concerned authority shall prepare a deed
of consent for marriage, also recording the matters specified in the
application and a statement to the effect that the parties to the
marriage have consented to accept each other as husband and wife,
cause the contracting parties and witnesses present to affix their
signature and thumb impression on the deed in his or her presence
and also sign the deed.
Provisions relating to registration of marriage: (1) After the
deed of consent has been signed pursuant to Section 79, the
concerned authority shall register such a marriage in the registration
book, which has to be signed by such an authority and also by the
parties to the marriage and witnesses present.
Once the marriage is registered pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned authority shall issue a marriage registration
certificate, in the form according to prevailing laws, to the parties to
the marriage registration.
Marriage shall be deemed to have been concluded
between the applicants from the date on which the marriage
registration certificate is obtained pursuant to sub-section (2).
Provision relating to use of surname by married woman: (1) A
married woman may, after marriage, use the surname used by her
father or mother or the surname of her husband or both the
surnames.
If a question arises as to the surname of a married
woman, except as otherwise proved, she shall be deemed to have
used the surname of her husband.
If the marriage of a woman who has used the surname
of her husband is dissolved, she may, if she so desires, use the
surname used by her father or mother.
Matrimonial relationship deemed to be terminated: In any of the
following circumstances, the matrimonial relationship between the
husband and the wife shall be deemed to have been terminated:
If marriage is annulled pursuant to Section 72 or 73,
If marriage is dissolved according to law between
husband and wife,
If the wife concludes another marriage before effecting
divorce pursuant to law.
Re-marriage may be concluded: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a man or a woman may remarry in any of the following circumstances:
If the matrimonial relationship between husband and
wife is terminated pursuant to Section 82,
If husband or wife dies,
If husband and wife are separated upon partition in
accordance with law.
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
months after the date on which such act was done or action taken.

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Consequences of Marriage
To be considered husband and wife: After the conclusion of
marriage between a man and a woman, they shall, so long as such
matrimonial relationship subsists, be considered each other's
husband and wife.
Relation and obligation of husband and wife: (1) The husband
and wife must have mutual love and good faith.
The husband and wife must establish and spend
conjugal life by living together, except as otherwise arranged
through mutual understanding.
The husband and wife must help, protect and respect
each other.
Husband's home to be considered residence: Except where a
separate residence is fixed by mutual understanding of the husband
and wife, the husband's home shall be considered to be the wife’s
residence.
To be considered each other's agent: Except as otherwise
provided for in the law or except where there is a legal dispute
between the husband and wife, the husband and wife shall be
considered as each other's agent in the general household affairs.
To provide, or cause to be provided, maintenance in accordance
with reputation: The husband and wife shall provide, or cause to
be provided, maintenance cost and health care to each other
according to their reputation and capacity.
Household affairs to be managed by consent: (1) The husband
and wife of an undivided family shall manage the household affairs
by mutual consent according to their property, income and capacity.
Except as otherwise provided in the law, the husband
or wife shall obtain each other's consent in selling or otherwise
transferring a property registered in his or her name.
Not to preclude from exercising profession, business or
occupation: The husband or wife or any member of the family
shall not preclude each other from exercising a profession, business
or occupation of their respective skill, qualification or ability.
Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
taken.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Divorce
Divorce may be effected by consent of both: If both the husband
and wife so desire, they may divorce the relationship of husband
and wife at any time.
Husband may effect divorce: The husband may effect divorce in
any of the following circumstances even without consent of the
wife:
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately after obtaining their partition share or
separating bread and board in accordance with law, if
the wife has been living separately for three or more
consecutive years, without consent of the husband,
If the wife deprives the husband of maintenance costs
or expels him from the house,
If the wife commits an act or conspiracy likely to cause
the grievous hurt or other severe physical or mental
pain to the husband,inher
If the wife is proved to have made sexual relation with
another person.
Wife may effect divorce: The wife may effect divorce in any of the
following circumstances, even without consent of the husband:
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately after obtaining their partition share or
separating bread and board in accordance with law, if
the husband has been living separately for three years
or more consecutively, without consent of the wife,
If the husband deprives the wife of maintenance costs
or expels her from home,
If the husband commits an act or conspiracy likely to
cause grievous hurt or other severe physical or mental
pain to the wife,
If the husband concludes another marriage,
If the husband is proved to have made sexual
intercourse with another woman,
If the husband is proved to have raped the wife.
Petition to be filed for divorce: The husband or wife, as the case
may be, desiring to get the relationship divorced shall file a petition
in the concerned district court.
Mediation to be made between husband and wife: If a petition is
filed for divorce pursuant to Section 96, the court shall, to the
extent possible, remind and convince both the parties and conciliate
them.
Divorce to be effected: If the court fails to make conciliation
between the husband and wife even after reminding and convincing
them pursuant to Section 97 and deems appropriate to get the
relationship divorced rather than to continue it any longer, the court
shall effect divorce between them.
Provided that if the husband and wife do not agree to
conciliate between them despite being reminded and convinced by
the court to that effect, the court shall effect divorce after one year
of the filing of the petition.
Partition of property to be effected before divorce: (1) If divorce
is to be effected because of the husband, the concerned court shall,
if the wife so demands, cause partition to be effected between the
husband and wife before effecting divorce.
If a petition is filed by the wife for divorce on the
ground referred to in clause (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) of Section 95,
divorce is deemed to be effected because of the husband, for the
purposes of sub-section (1).
If a property in common is registered in the name of
both husband and wife or either of them, then such property shall be
partitioned between them according to law, prior to effecting
divorce.
If the husband himself has not obtained partition from
his father or other coparceners, the court shall, by causing both the
parties to disclose the coparceners, and if there are other
coparceners who are entitled to partition, by inquiring such
coparceners as well, cause partition to be apportioned between the
husband and wife.
If it appears that it may take a long time to effect
partition pursuant to sub-section (1), (3) or (4), the court may effect
divorce between the husband and wife and order the husband to
provide the wife with monthly expenses as alimony according to the
property and income of the husband until the partition is effected.
Provided that if such a woman concludes another marriage
before effecting partition, she shall not be entitled to a partition
share.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a petition is filed for divorce on the ground referred to in
clause (b), (c) or (d) of Section 94, the husband shall not be
compelled to provide partition share or alimony to the wife
pursuant to this Chapter.
100. Order to pay lump sum amount or alimony: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 99, if the wife who effects divorce
desires to obtain from the husband a lump sum amount or annual or
monthly alimony or expense, instead of the partition share, the
court may order the husband to provide such a wife with a lump
sum amount or annual or monthly alimony or expense on the basis
of his property or income.
Provided that if such a wife concludes another marriage, it is
not required to provide such amount or alimony.
101. Order to provide maintenance costs: If the wife, who has not
obtained partition from the husband for there being no property for
partition under Section 99, desires to receive maintenance costs
from the husband and the husband has income, the Court may order
the husband to provide maintenance costs to the wife according to
the income of the divorced husband.
Provided that:
If such a wife concludes another marriage, it is not
required to provide such costs,
If the income of the wife is higher than that of the
husband, it is not required to provide such costs.
102. To be according to agreement: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if there exists a written
agreement between the husband and wife on the partition share or
alimony to which the wife is entitled upon divorce, it shall be
according to such agreement.
Provided that no agreement which is against the interest of a
minor may be made.
103. Previous child or husband to obtain property: On the death of a
divorcee woman, her son, daughter, if any, shall be entitled to her
property, and if not, the previous husband shall obtain the property
received by her from such a husband, and the successor on her
mother's side shall obtain the other property.
104. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
months after the date of accrual of the cause of action or knowledge
of such an act or action.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Relationship of Mother, Father and Son and
Daughter
105. Maternity or paternity to be determined from mother or father:
(1) If it is required to determine a person's maternity or paternity, it
shall be determined on the basis of his or her mother or father, as
the case may be.
In determining paternity pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person who was the husband of his or her mother at the time of
birth of such a person shall be presumed, unless otherwise proved,
to be a father of such a person.
106. Child presumed to be born from married husband: Unless
otherwise proved, a child born in any of the following
circumstances shall be presumed to be born from the married
husband:
Born after one hundred eighty days from the date on
which the marriage was concluded,
Born within two hundred seventy-two days from the
date on which the husband died or divorce was effected.
107. Paternity may be denied: (1) Except as otherwise agreed upon
between the husband and wife, the paternity of a child born to the
wife before one hundred eighty days of the conclusion of marriage
may be denied by the husband and by the successor to the husband
where the husband had already died before the birth of such child.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a man concludes marriage with a woman with knowledge or
having reasonable ground to know that she was pregnant before the
marriage, the paternity of a child cannot be denied merely on the
ground of his or her birth before that period.
108. Son, daughter or paternity to be claimed: (1) If a child whose
paternity or maternity is not determined has to be claimed as one's
own son or daughter, such claim shall be made within a period of
two years of the child being born or being identified.
In claiming the paternity of a child born without the
paternity being identified, a claim shall be made within a period of
two years of the birth of such child.
Provided that no claim may be entertained if such child is
already dead.
109. Paternity of child born from artificial insemination to be of
father: A child born from the use, with consent of the husband and
wife, of artificial insemination system from semen of another
person shall be considered to have been born from the married
husband and his or her paternity shall be determined accordingly.
110. To be according to court's decision: If there arises a dispute as to
the maternity or paternity of a person, its settlement shall be as
decided by the Court.
111. To obtain name and surname: (1) Each person shall, after birth,
obtain the name as designated by his or her mother or father
according to his or her religion, culture, usage or tradition.
If the mother or father of a person is not available for
the time being or is not likely to be so available, the person shall
obtain the name as designated by the guardian or curator taking care
of (herchaha) him or her.
Each person shall, after birth, be entitled to use after
his or her name the surname designated with the consent of his or
her father and mother or failing such consent, the surname of his or
her father.
Provided that a person whose paternity is not traced out shall
be entitled to use after his or her name the surname of his or her
mother.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
a person may, if he or she so wishes, use the surname of his or her
father or mother or of both.
If a dispute arises as to the surname of a person, he or
she shall be considered, unless otherwise proved, to have used the
surname of his or her father.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a person whose both father and mother are not traced out
shall be entitled to use after his or her name the surname given by
the guardian taking care of (herchaha) him or her.
112. Name of mother, father, grand-father and grand-mother may
be mentioned: (1) If the name of mother, father and grand-father,
grandmother is required by law to be mentioned in a formal act,
legal act and proceeding or deed, any person shall be entitled to
mention the name of his or her mother, father and grand-father,
grand-mother.
If the father of a person who has to mention the name
of his or her mother, father and grand-father, grand-mother pursuant
to sub-section (1) is not traced out, the person may mention the
name of his or her mother and the mother's grand-father, grandmother, and even where the mother's name is not traced out, it shall
be sufficient to mention, setting out that matter, the name of the
guardian or curator if he or she is a minor, and only his or her name
if he or she is a major.
113. Birth of son, daughter to be registered: (1) If a son or daughter is
born to a couple, the mother or father shall file an application,
within three months of the birth of such a son or a daughter, before
the authority specified according to law, for the birth registration.
If one intends to file an application for the registration
of a son or a daughter after the expiry of the time-limit referred to
in sub-section (1), such fee as specified according to prevailing
laws shall be charged.
If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the concerned authority shall, after entering the details in the
birth register maintained in the office, issue a certificate of birth
registration in the form as specified by the law to the applicant.
The details to be entered in the register under subsection (3) shall include the concerned person's name, surname,
date of birth (year, month, instant and day as well) and place of
birth, and the name, surname and address of his or her mother,
father and grand-mother and grand-father, as well.
The concerned authority shall forward the details
entered, pursuant to sub-section (3), in the register maintained in
the office up to the last day of every month to the District
Administration Office, within a period of fifteen days of the first
month thereafter and the said Office shall also enter such details up
to the end of every month in the birth register maintained in the
office for that purpose and forward the same in every three months
to the Ministry specified by the Government of Nepal by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette.
The concerned Ministry shall enter the details received
pursuant to sub-section (5) in the birth register maintained for that
purpose and maintain up-dated details each year.
114. Obligation to care (herchaha) and maintain(shyahar samhar):
(1) The mother and father shall jointly care and maintain their every
minor.
In caring and maintaining pursuant to sub-section (1),
the father and mother shall provide for maintenance, health care,
education,
sports
entertainment
other
necessary
arrangements, according to their financial condition and capability.
115. To be under custody of mother or father: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 114, if matrimonial relationship
between a husband and wife is extinguished in accordance with law,
a minor born from them shall remain in the custody of the mother
or the father as provided herein below:
In the case of a minor who has not attained five
years of age, under the custody of the mother, if she
so desires irrespective of whether or not she has
concluded another marriage,
In the case of a minor above five years of age,
except where the mother has concluded another
marriage, under the custody of the mother, if she so
desires,
In the circumstance other than that referred to in
clause (a) or (b), under the custody of the father.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the husband and wife have entered a separate agreement on
the custody of a minor at the time of divorce or judicial separation,
the agreement shall apply to the custody of the minor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
while deciding as to which of the father and the mother has the
custody of a minor above ten years of age, the opinion of the
concerned minor may also be obtained.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the mother or father, under whose custody a minor is
living, dies, the surviving father or mother shall take the minor
under his or her custody without any delay.
Provided that if the mother has already concluded another
marriage, she is not obliged to take a minor above five years of age
under her custody.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the husband and wife, who get separated in accordance
with law, have a minor, the maintenance, education and heath care
of such a minor shall be according to the agreement concluded, if
any, between the husband and wife in that respect, and in the
absence of such an agreement, it shall be as follows:
In the case of a minor below five years of age, the
minor shall be under the mother's custody,
In the case of a minor who is of five years of age or
above five but below ten years of age, the minor
shall be under the father’s custody,
In case of a minor having attained ten years of age,
the minor shall be under the mother’s or the father’s
custody, with whom the minor desires to live.
116. Obligation to take necessary care (herchaha) and provide
maintenance (shyahar samhar): (1) The father or mother, as the
case may be, who takes the custody of a minor pursuant to Section
115, shall take care of and maintain such minor, and, in so taking
care of and maintaining the minor, the father or mother, as the case
may be, shall do so in accordance with the provisions referred to in
sub-section (2) of Section 114.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the income of the father or mother who does not take the custody
of a minor is higher than that of the father or mother who takes the
custody of the minor, such a mother or a father shall provide such a
minor with such expenses, for the purpose of maintenance,
education and treatment of the minor, as agreed upon between such
father and mother and in the absence of such agreement, as
specified by the court.
117. Facility of visit to be provided: (1) In cases where matrimonial
relationship is extinguished or the mother or father are living
separately in accordance with law, the minor shall be allowed to
visit, from time to time, the father if he or she is living under the
mother’s custody and the mother if he or she is living under the
father’s custody, or with the consent of the mother and father, to
stay with either of them for some time.
Provided that if it appears that the interest of the minor is
likely to be prejudiced in availing the facility of such visit or stay,
the concerned court may issue an order prohibiting such visit or
stay.
The frequency of visit to, or the period of stay with, the
father or the mother, as the case may be, pursuant to sub-section (1),
shall be as fixed by the concerned mother and father and, in the
absence of such fixation, shall be as ordered by the concerned court.
If a minor is living with his father or mother pursuant
to this Section, the father or mother taking the custody of the minor
shall take care of and maintain him or her in accordance with subsection (2) of Section 114.
118. Rights of son, daughter remain to exist: (1) Notwithstanding the
matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife is
extinguished pursuant to this Chapter, the legal rights of the son,
daughter born from them vis-à-vis the father, mother and the
obligation of the father, mother vis-à-vis him or her shall remain in
existence.
In spite of the father and mother of a person being
incapable of becoming husband and wife in accordance with this
Act, the legal rights of the son, daughter born from them vis-à-vis
the father, mother and the obligation of the father, mother vis-à-vis
him or her shall remain in existence.
119. Prohibition on living separately without consent: (1) A son,
daughter shall not, without consent of his or her father or mother,
live separately from his or her father or mother.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
a son, daughter may live separately from his or her father, mother in
the following circumstance:
If he or she is separated from his or her father,
mother, with or without obtaining partition
according to law,
If he or she concludes marriage,
If he or she attains at least twenty one years of age,
If he or she is already employed.
120. Minor not to work as labor: A minor who is allowed to be
engaged in a work as a labor according to law cannot work as a
labor without consent of the mother, father, other guardian or
curator.
121. Decision of father, mother taking custody of minor to prevail: If
there arises a dispute between the father and mother, who cannot
conclude marriage between them or whose matrimonial relationship
is extinguished pursuant to this Act, on any matter to be decided in
respect of the right and interest of a minor born from such father
and mother, the decision made by the father or mother, as the case
may be, with whom such a minor is living shall prevail.
122. Son or daughter to honor, respect and care (herchaha) mother,
father: (1) Every son or daughter shall treat his or her mother,
father with honor and respect.
Every son or daughter shall, according to his or her
financial and social status, provide necessary care, maintenance,
medical treatment or attention to his or her mother, father,
notwithstanding living in an undivided family or separately in
accordance with law.
123. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within the
specific statute of limitation, if any, provided in this Chapter for
making such lawsuit, and within six months after the date on which
such an act was done or action taken, in the other circumstances.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Parental Authority
124. To be under supervision and control of father and mother: (1)
A minor son, daughter shall live under the supervision, oversight,
control or authority of their father and mother.
A minor living under sub-section (1) shall obey lawful
order or direction given by his or her father, mother.
125. Parental authority to be exercised jointly: (1) The mother and
father shall, jointly and with their mutual consent, exercise such
authority over, fulfill such responsibility and duty towards, their
son and daughter as required to be exercised and fulfilled under this
Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the following mother or father, as the case may be, shall, in the
following circumstance, exercise such authority and fulfill such
responsibility and duty as to be exercised and fulfilled pursuant to
the said sub-section:
If either of the father and mother dies, the surviving
mother or father,
If either of the mother and father is of unsound
mind, the mother or father of sound mind, during
the period of existence of such state of mind,
If the matrimonial relationship between the mother
and father is dissolved or they have been living
separate according to law, the mother or father who
has taken the custody of the minor,
If the father of a minor is not traced out, the mother.
126. Rights, responsibilities and duties of person exercising maternal
and parental authority: The rights, responsibilities and duties of
the father or mother who is entitled to exercise the parental
authority pursuant to this Chapter shall be as follows:
To keep the minor with him or her, provide
company to the minor and watch the minor's works,
actions and behaviors,
To provide food and clothes and to teach him or her
to eat, wear and labor,
To provide affection, fondness and love,
To inculcate in him or her social dignity, decency,
morals, rites, culture, customs and to educate him or
her to behave accordingly;
To provide moral education based on social values
such as honesty, self-confidence, self-reliance,
integrity, labor and discipline,
To vigil physical and mental health, to provide and
cause to be provided medical treatment,
To provide opportunity, according to necessity, for
sports and entertainment,
To make available read-worthy and messageoriented educational materials,
To guide to remain loyal to the family, society,
community, nation and state,
To prevent from bad habits, bad association and
obscene matter,
To teach to obey order, honor and revere,
To do, or cause to be done, such other act
whatsoever as may be required for the development
of physical, mental and intellectual personality.
127. Prohibition on discrimination: The mother or father shall not
make discrimination between their children, in any manner, in the
maintenance, education and upbringing, sports, medical treatment,
entertainment, facility or household work of their children on the
ground of son or daughter or between sons or between daughters.
128. Special care (herchaha) to be taken: (1) If any son or daughter
is physically or mentally handicapped or disabled or has contracted
a deadly disease such as human immune-deficiency virus (HIV) or
Hepatitis B, the mother, father shall take special care of, and
provide special treatment and protection to, such a son or a
daughter.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"physically or mentally handicapped" means a physically or
mentally impaired person who himself or herself is unable or
incompetent to carry out daily work.
In order to make the son or daughter as referred to in
sub-section (1) financially self-reliant in the future by having
arrangements for providing special medical treatment, the mother
and father shall make, according to their financial condition and
capacity, arrangements for imparting special education or training
to such son or daughter.
129. Power to cause minor to improve conduct and habit: If the
mother or father consider it necessary to make the minor, who is
under their supervision, oversight, control or authority pursuant to
this Chapter, improve his or her behavior, habit, conduct and
character, they may do such acts as they think appropriate vis-à-vis
such a minor and make him or her improve his or her behavior,
habit or conduct.
Provided that the minor shall not be subjected to any
treatment that entails physical or mental pain.
130. Authority deemed to be provided to exercise right: If the mother
and father appoint a teacher for the education and upbringing of
their son or daughter or admits the child into an educational
institute for any kind of education, the teacher so appointed or the
headmaster or teacher of such an institute shall be deemed to have
been given the authority to exercise the rights as referred to in

Section 129 in respect of education and upbringing.
131. Guardian or curator may also exercise parental authority: If a
minor is living with the guardian or curator for the reason that both
of his or her mother and father have died or disappeared or his or
her mother has concluded another marriage following the death of
his or her father or both of his or her mother and father have
become of unsound mind, his or her guardian or curator, as the case
may be, may exercise such paternal authority and fulfill such
responsibilities and duties as required to be exercised and fulfilled
by the mother and father under this Chapter.
132. Power to restrict parental authority: (1) If a complaint is filed by
a person or a child welfare organization incorporated pursuant to
law specifying that a person who is entitled to exercise the paternal
authority pursuant to this Chapter has committed any of the
following acts against a minor and, if the allegation is proved from
an inquiry into the matter, the court may prevent such a person from
exercising such authority:
Subjecting a minor to cruel, inhumane or torturous
punishment or treatment,
Neglecting, disregarding or abusing the minor from
time to time,
Engaging a minor in an immoral or sexual
profession,
Employing a minor in a work likely to endanger the
body, life or health,
Causing loss and damage to a minor’s property by
spending it against his or her interest or selling such
property to others with the intention of taking it
subsequently,
Compelling a minor to abandon family life by
making him or her a Sanyasi, fakir, monk, nun,
Paschar or in similar other way,
Engaging a minor in begging, except while
observing a religious or cultural rite,
Causing a minor to do any other act constituting an
offense under law.
If a restriction is imposed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall appoint a guardian according to law, authorizing him
or her to exercise the parental authority in respect of such a minor.
If the guardian is appointed to exercise the parental
authority pursuant to sub-section (2), such a guardian may exercise
the parental authority under this Chapter in consonance with the
interests of the minor.
If the person, who is prevented from exercising the
parental authority pursuant to sub-section (1), makes a petition in
the Court, making an undertaking not to repeat the act referred to in
the said sub-section, the court may lift the restriction imposed on
him or her and revoke the appointment as referred to in sub-section
133. Termination of parental authority: (1) The parental authority
which the mother and father are entitled to exercise over their son
or daughter child pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to have
been terminated in any of the following circumstances:
If the son or daughter attains eighteen years of age,
If the son or daughter lives separately after getting
an employment.
Provided that where any son or daughter is
physically or mentally handicapped, the parental
authority over him or her shall, except in cases
where he or she lives separately by concluding
marriage, not be terminated.
134. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
taken.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Guardianship
135. To be considered guardian: A person who is appointed or liable
under this Chapter to protect the person, protection of rights and
interest of an incompetent or quasi-competent person shall be
considered to be a guardian.
136. Priority order of guardian: (1) Subject to the other Sections of
this Chapter, a person in the following priority order shall, ipso
facto, be a guardian of an incompetent or quasi-competent person:
Husband or wife living in a joint family,
Father or mother,
Son, daughter or widow daughter-in-law living in a
joint family,
Separated husband or wife,
Separated son, daughter or widow daughter-in-law,
Grand-father or grand-mother,
Grand-son or grand-daughter,
Elder or younger brother or elder or younger sister,
Grand-father, grand-mother on the mother's parent
side, maternal uncle, maternal aunty.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the following person shall be a guardian in the following
circumstances:
Where there are more than one person in one
priority order eligible to be a guardian, the person
mutually agreed upon by them, and in the absence
of such agreement, the person as designated by the
court,
In the case of a person of sound mind and having
attained ten years of age, a person chosen by him or
Provided that in so choosing the guardian, a deed
shall be executed to that effect and certified by the
court.
In the case of a minor of a couple whose
matrimonial relationship has been extinguished in
accordance with law, the father or mother who
maintains him or her,
If any person who is in the first priority order
declines to be a guardian, becomes of unsound mind
or does not act in the capacity of a guardian, the
person who is in the next priority order.
Provided that if a person in the next order is
to so become a guardian, the person shall get it
certified by the court that he or she is the guardian.
137. Other person considered to be guardian: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136, if guardianship to an
incompetent or quasi-competent person is provided by a person
other than the one referred to in that Section, the person so
providing guardianship shall be considered to be a guardian of such
a person.
Provided that the person who so becomes a guardian shall get
it certified by the court that he or she is the guardian.
138. Organization considered to be guardian: (1) If a child, who is
living in an organization, such as a child welfare house, orphanage,
child home or children's organization, registered pursuant to law
with the object to have welfare of and protect rights and interests of
children, has no other guardian, such an organization shall be
considered to be his or her guardian.
In doing any act or taking any action on behalf of a
minor living in an organization referred to in sub-section (1), the
chief of such an organization shall do such an act or take such an
action.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter-7
of Part-3, the term "chief" means the chief executive officer of that
organization or the chairperson, general manager, managing
director or other officer acting in that capacity.
139. Guardian may be appointed by court: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136 or 137, the court may, in the
following circumstances, appoint a particular person as the guardian,
specifying the reason therefor:
If the concerned ward committee of the concerned
Local Level files a petition in the court for the
appointment of guardian in cases where any person
declines to be a guardian pursuant to Section 136,
If the stakeholder files a petition in the court for the
appointment of guardian.
In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall consider whether or not the rights, interests or protection
of such incompetent or quasi-competent person may be secured.
In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall also obtain the consent of the person to be appointed as
the guardian.
After appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall give a written notice thereof to the person to be
guardian and the Local Level.
140. Supervisor may be designated: (1) If a guardian is appointed by the
court pursuant to Section 139, the court may, if it considers
necessary to inquire into the acts and actions of such a guardian,
designate any person as the supervisor.
The supervisor designated pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall make necessary inquiry into the acts and actions of the guardian
and submit a report thereof to the court.
If the guardianship is terminated pursuant to Section
148, the state of supervision shall also be, ipso facto deemed to be,
terminated.
141. Disqualifications for guardian: None of the following persons may
become a guardian:
An incompetent or quasi-competent person,
A person proved to have done an act against the
rights and interests of an incompetent or quasicompetent person,
A person sentenced by a court to imprisonment for a
term of three years or more.
Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to
prevent a person who is in the priority order under
sub-section (1) of Section 136 from being a guardian.
A person deemed disqualified to be a guardian by a
count.
142. Maintenance
(palan
poshan)
(herbichar)
incompetent or quasi-competent person: (1) The guardian shall
make arrangements for the maintenance, health, education,
entertainment and care of an incompetent or quasi-competent person
under his or her guardianship from the property belonging to such a
person, if any, and if such property is not available, from the
property belonging to the guardian himself or herself.
arrangements
maintenance,
health,
education, entertainment and care of an incompetent or quasicompetent person, pursuant to sub-section (1), shall be made from
the movable property belonging to such a person, if any, and where
there is no such movable property or where arrangements for the
maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care cannot be
made from that property, his or her immovable property may be sold
for that purpose with the prior permission of the court.
Provided that it is not required to obtain permission of the
court to sell the immovable property where a person in the priority
order under sub-section (1) of Section 136 is the guardian.
143. Property to be supervised, protected and managed properly: (1)
The guardian shall supervise and protect the property belonging to
the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his or her
guardianship.
The guardian may carry on any business or transaction
by investing the property belonging to the person under his or her
guardianship.
144. To maintain books and accounts accurately: (1) The guardian
shall maintain accurately the books and accounts of expenditures
incurred in the maintenance(palan poshan), health, education and
care of (herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person
under his or her guardianship, and of the incomes and expenditures
made in the course of the management of the property belonging to
that person and the inventory proving the ownership of such property.
Provided that it is not required to maintain such books and
accounts where a person in the priority order referred to in subsection (1) of Section 136 is a guardian.
The guardian shall submit the books and accounts
maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) and the inventory proving the
ownership of that property to the incompetent or quasi-competent
person within one year after the date on which that person has
attained majority pursuant to law or the date on which that person
has notified in writing the court that he or she is competent to carry
out business.
If an incompetent or quasi-competent person dies when
he or she was under guardianship, the guardian shall submit the
books and accounts and the inventory proving ownership of that
property referred to in sub-section (1) to that person’s nearest
successor within six months after the date of his or her death.
145. Power to institute legal action or defend case: The guardian may,
for the protection of the rights, interests of an incompetent or quasicompetent person under his or her guardianship, institute a legal
action against such a person or defend a case filed against him or her.
Provided that the guardian is not allowed to so renounce a
claim or plea in relation to a case instituted upon the incompetent or
quasi-competent person being its plaintiff or defendant or execute a
deed of compromise in any case as to cause an adverse effect to him
or her.
146. Power to act on behalf of incompetent or quasi-competent
person: Subject to the provisions contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, the guardian may carry out such act on behalf of the
incompetent or quasi-competent person as may be carried out by that
person according to law.
147. Act may be carried out only in consonance with terms:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
person is designated as the guardian for an incompetent or quasicompetent person with specification of certain terms, such a guardian
shall have the authority to carry out acts only in consonance with
such terms.
148. Termination of guardianship: (1) A guardianship shall be deemed
to be terminated in any of the following circumstances:
If a petition filed by the guardian stating that he or
she is unable to be a guardian is accepted by the
court,
If the guardian or the incompetent or quasicompetent person under guardianship dies,
If the incompetent or quasi-competent person
becomes a competent,
If, at the request of the incompetent or quasicompetent person under guardianship, the court
removes the guardian.
If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to sub-section
(1) and the person who was the guardian and the person who was
under guardianship are surviving, the person who had worked as
guardian shall continue to maintain (palan poshan) and take care
of(herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his
or her guardianship until another guardian is appointed.
If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to sub-section
(1), the statute of limitation, time-limit or appointed date for
appearance in relation to any legal proceedings required to be carried
out by the guardian pursuant to this Chapter shall not be deemed to
have been expired, from the date on which the guardianship is so
terminated until another guardian is appointed.
149. Guardianship not to be transferred to successor: If a guardianship
is terminated upon the death of the guardian pursuant to Section 148,
the right, authority and responsibility vested in him or her in the
capacity of a guardian shall not be transferred to his or her successor.
Provided that in cases where another guardian is required to be
appointed for an incompetent or quasi-competent person, he or she
shall, in the capacity of the successor to the guardian,
maintain(palanposhan) and take care of (herbichar) such
incompetent or quasi-competent person until another guardian is
appointed.
150. Power to recover expenses: If any guardian has arranged the
maintenance, health, education, sports, entertainment and care
of(herbichar) the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his
or her guardianship from his or her own property, the guardian may
recover the amount of expenses so incurred from the property
belonging to the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his or
her guardianship.
Provided that such expense cannot be so recovered where a
person in the priority order referred to in sub-section (1) of Section
136 is the guardian.
151. Amount of loss and damage may be recovered: If the guardian
knowingly, deceitfully, fraudulently or dishonestly causes loss and
damage to the property belonging to the incompetent or quasicompetent person under his or her guardianship in such manner as to
or not to benefit himself or herself, the incompetent or quasicompetent person aggrieved therefrom may recover the amount of
loss and damage caused to him or her from such a guardian.
152. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
months after the date of knowledge of such act or action.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Curatorship
153. To be curator of minor: (1) If any minor does not have any
guardian as referred to in Chapter-6 of this Part, any person may act
in the capacity of curator of such a minor for the maintenance,
health, education, care of, and protection of property belonging to,
him or her, until the minor attains eighteen years of age.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
a person may appoint any one as a curator for the maintenance,
health, education and care of his or her minor.
154. Curator of person of unsound mind: (1) If a person of unsound
mind does not have any guardian as referred to in Chapter-6 of this
Part, any other person may act in the capacity of curator for the
maintenance, care of, and protection of property belonging to, him
or her.
If there is no curator or the curator cannot be
ascertained under sub-section (1), the person under whose custody,
supervision or oversight the person of unsound mind is living for
the time being shall be the curator of such a person.
155. Mother to become curator of minor: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 153, if the father of any minor below ten years
of age has died or disappeared or become of unsound mind or is in
abroad and the mother of such a minor is alive, she herself shall be
the curator of that minor even though she has concluded another
marriage.
156. Body corporate to become curator: (1) If any person who has no
guardian under Chapter-6 of this Part is under the supervision,
protection or custody of a body corporate, such a body corporate
shall be the curator of such a person.
If a body corporate referred to in sub-section (1)
becomes a curator, the chief of such a body corporate shall exercise
the authority of a curator.
157. Court may appoint curator: (1) If any person has no guardian
under Chapter-6 of this Part or no one acts as his or her curator, the
concerned ward committee of the Local Level may file a petition,
stating the details thereof, in the court for the appointment of a
curator.
In filing a petition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned ward committee of the Local Level shall set out the
names, surnames, addresses and professions of the potential persons
who could be appointed as the curator and also submit, along with
the petition, a deed of consent given by such potential persons to act
as the curator.
If a petition is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall make an order to appoint any one appropriate person,
out of the persons whose names are submitted pursuant to subsection (2), as the curator.
158. Qualifications of curator: Any person other than a person who is
disqualified for being a guardian pursuant to Section 141 may
become a curator.
159. Curator to take custody of property: (1) The curator shall take
custody of, manage and operate, the property belonging to the
person under his or her curatorship.
The curator shall arrange for the maintenance,
education and medical treatment of the person under his or her
curatorship, to the extent possible in view of his or her capacity,
from the property taken into custody by him or her.
160. Power to use property: A person who becomes a curator may
spend all the returns obtained from the property under his or her
custody for the maintenance, health of the person under his or her
curatorship and for the education of such a person, if he or she is a
minor.
161. Power to spend immovable property with court's permission:
(1) If the movable property belonging to the person under his or her
curatorship is insufficient to meet the expenses required for the
maintenance, education or medical treatment of that person, the
curator may file a petition, setting out the matter, in the court for
permission to sell the immovable property or any part thereof for
that purpose.
If, upon inquiring into a petition filed pursuant to subsection (1), it considers the reason for selling such immovable
property to be reasonable, the court may grant permission to so sell
the immovable property or any part thereof as it considers
appropriate.
162. Property to be taken care of and protected rationally and
carefully: (1) A curator shall look after of and protect the property
belonging to a person under his or her curatorship rationally and
carefully.
The concerned curator shall be liable for any kind of
loss or damage to the property belonging to the person under his or
her curatorship because of his or her failure to so look after and
protect the property pursuant to sub-section (1).
Provided that the curator shall not be liable for any loss or
damage to such property due to a disaster.
If a complaint is filed with allegation that the curator
has failed to look after of and protect the property pursuant to subsection (1), the court may remove the concerned person from
curatorship.
163. Transfer of title, ipso facto to be void: If a curator sells any
immovable property belonging to the person under his or her
curatorship to himself or herself or to any of his or her family
members, with ulterior motive to disentitling such a person to that
property or the title thereto happens to be transferred to him or her
in any manner, such transfer of title shall, ipso facto, be void.
164. Curatorship to be terminated ipso facto: (1) Curatorship shall be
deemed to have been terminated ipso facto in any of the following
circumstances:
In the case of a minor, if he or she attains eighteen
years of age,
In the case of a person of unsound mind, if he or
she becomes of sound mind,
If custody of the minor is taken by the mother or
father or both,
If the guardian of a minor or person of unsound
mind is appointed,
If the court removes a person from curatorship
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 162,
If the curator has no qualification referred to in

Section 158,
If the curator or the person under curatorship dies.
If curatorship is terminated pursuant to sub-section (1),
the curator shall immediately return to the concerned person the
property taken into custody in the capacity of curator.
165. Custody of property may be handed over: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person is unable
to protect and manage the property under his or her title, ownership
or possession on his or her own, for the reason that he or she has to
go elsewhere by leaving the place where he or she resides, he or she
may appoint any person as a curator to that end and hand over the
custody of such property to that other person.
If the custody of property is handed over to any person
pursuant to sub-section (1), the person taking the custody of such
property shall protect and manage the property and return the
property to the person handing over its custody as and when the
handing over person so requires.
166. Requirement to certification by court: One who becomes a
curator pursuant to Sections 153, 154 and 165 shall get that matter
certified by the court.
167. Application of other provisions: The provisions contained in
Sections 144, 145, 146, 147, 149, 150 and 151 shall also apply
mutatis mutandis to the curator and the person under curatorship.
168. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
months after the date of knowledge of such an act or action.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Adoption
169. To be deemed adopted son or adopted daughter: If a person
accepts a son or daughter of another person as his or her son or
daughter, such a son or a daughter shall be deemed to be an adopted
son or daughter.
170. Adoption to be effected in a manner to protect the best interests
of child: In effecting adoption pursuant to this Act, adoption shall
be effected in a manner to protect the best rights and interests of the
child.
171. Prohibition on adoption by person having child: (1) No person
having his or her own son shall adopt a son and no person having
his or her own daughter shall adopt a daughter pursuant to this
Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a son or daughter does not live with a man or woman who is
living separately by the reason of judicial separation, such a man or
a woman may adopt a son or a daughter.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter and Chapter-9
of this Part, the term "judicial separation" means a circumstance
where a person obtains partition in property according to the order
of the court or lives separately according to law or lives separately
after separation of bread and board from other coparceners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), if a person who has a biological son or daughter makes a
petition in the concerned court for the adoption of another child,
disclosing therein his or her financial capacity to make
arrangements for the maintenance, health care, education and care
of the child, and if, upon inquiring into such a petition, it appears
that the petitioner has such status, the court may grant permission to
him or her to adopt such child.
172. Adoption may be effected: (1) The following person may effect
adoption of a child:
A couple to whom no child has born even up to ten
years of the marriage,
An unmarried woman having completed forty-five
years of age, a widow, divorcee woman or
judicially separated woman, having no son or
daughter,
An unmarried man having completed forty-five
years of age, a widower, divorcee or judicially
separated man, having no son or daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the following person cannot effect adoption:
One who is of unsound mind,
One who is convicted by the court of a criminal
offense involving moral turpitude,
One who does not have financial capacity to afford
maintenance, health care, education, sports facility,
entertainment and care of the minor.
In effecting adoption by the husband or wife living in a
joint family pursuant to this Section, they shall obtain each other's
consent.
173. Adoption not to be effected: (1) No one shall effect adoption of
any of the following persons:
One who has completed fourteen years of age,
One who is the only son or daughter,
Provided that this provision shall not apply to the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (3) of Section
One who has been once adopted as a son or daughter,
Provided that this provision shall not apply
where the adoption is annulled according to law.
One who is in higher degree of relationship than the
person adopting the son or daughter,
One who is not a citizen of Nepal.
Provided that the provision of this clause shall
not apply to a non-resident Nepali citizen who has
obtained a foreign citizenship.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of
sub-section (1), if the person to be adopted is a person within the
relation of three generations or a son or daughter born to the exhusband of the wife, that person may be adopted even though he or
she has completed fourteen years of age.
174. Difference of age between adopter and adoptee: (1) The age
difference between the adopter and the adoptee shall be at least
twenty-five years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no age restriction shall apply to the adoption of a person within the
relation of three generations.
175. Consent to be obtained for adoption: (1) In effecting adoption of
a child, the adopter shall obtain written consent of both father and
mother of such a child, if both of them are surviving, and of the
surviving father or mother, as the case may be, if either of them is
surviving.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the father and mother are separated because of the dissolution of
matrimonial relationship between the husband and wife or judicial
separation, and a child living with such a father or mother
according to the agreement made at the time of such dissolution or
judicial separation is intended to be adopted, the adopter shall
obtain consent of the person with whom, out of the father and the
mother, the child has been living.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
adoption of a child whose father and mother are not traced or
surviving or a child whose father and mother are surviving but who
has been maintained or cared by a person or organization following
the conclusion of another marriage either by his or her father or
mother may be effected by obtaining written consent of the person
or organization so maintaining or caring the child.
While adopting a child above ten years of age pursuant
to sub-section (1), (2) or (3), written consent of such a child shall
also be obtained.
Written consent referred to in sub-section (4) shall be
executed by the concerned child in the presence of his or her father,
mother or guardian or curator exercising the maternal and parental
authority.
Before obtaining consent pursuant to this Section,
information shall be given to the person putting a child up for
adoption, guardian or curator and the child about, inter alia, the
meaning, legal status and consequences of adoption.
No financial inducement of any type shall be made in
obtaining consent pursuant to this Section and such consent requires
to be given voluntarily.
176. Adoption deemed to have been effected by couple themselves: If
adoption was effected by the husband or wife living under judicial
separation and, subsequent thereto, the husband and wife have lived
jointly, the adoption effected before living so jointly shall be
deemed to have been effected by the couple.
177. Procedures for effecting adoption: (1) If a person is desirous of
adopting a child, he or she shall make a petition to the concerned
court, along with a duly executed deed of adoption, in fulfillment of
the legal requirements.
If, upon inquiring into the deed of adoption received
pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned district court finds that
permission may be given to the petitioner for adoption, it shall issue
an order granting permission for adoption and shall authenticate
such deed.
If, upon making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court finds that permission cannot be given to the petitioner for
adoption, it shall issue an order accordingly and give information
thereof to the petitioner.
178. Entitlements and rights of adopted son or daughter: (1) The
entitlements, rights, obligations and responsibilities of an adopted
son or daughter shall be the same as that of a biological son or
daughter of the adoptive person.
Even if a son or daughter is born to a person who has
already adopted a person, the equal status of such adopted son or
adopted daughter to that of biological son or daughter shall not be
prejudiced thereby.
179. Surname of adopted son or daughter: An adopted son or
daughter may use the surname of either or both of the adoptive
father and mother.
Provided that-
If an adopted son or daughter so desires, he or she
may use also the surname of his or her biological
father or mother.
If the adoption is annulled, his or her surname shall
be that of his or her biological father or mother.
180. Not allowed to claim partition share of father and mother: An
adopted son or daughter shall not be entitled to claim partition share
in the property belonging to his or her biological father and mother.
Provided that-
If the adoption is annulled, he or she may claim
partition share in the property belonging to his or her
biological father and mother,
If an adopted son or daughter has already obtained his
or her partition share at the time of effecting adoption,
he or she may receive such property as well.
181. Adoptive person's obligations: (1) The obligations of an adoptive
person shall be as follows:
To make arrangements for the maintenance, health
care, sports, entertainment and proper education of
the adopted son or daughter according to his or her
reputation and capacity as if he or she were his or
her biological son or daughter,
To protect the rights and interests of the adopted
son or daughter,
To exercise the authority as referred to in Chapter-5
of this Part.
If the adoptive person does not fulfill the obligations
under sub-section (1), the adopted son or daughter may live
separately by obtaining his or her partition share.
182. Obligations of adopted son or daughter: The obligations of the
adopted son or daughter shall be as follows:
To make arrangements for the maintenance, health
care and care of the adoptive person according to
his or her reputation and capacity as if such person
were his or her natural father or mother,
To protect, look after and properly manage the
property of the adoptive person,
To protect the rights and interests of the adoptive
person.
183. Facility of visit and making correspondences to be provided:
The adoptive person shall provide facility to the adopted son or
daughter to make visits to, and correspondence with, his or her
biological father and mother, from time to time.
184. Adoption to be void: If a person effects adoption in contravention
of Section 171, sub-section (1) of, and clauses (a) and (b) of subsection (2) of Section 172, Sections 173, 174 and 175, such
adoption shall ipso facto be void.
185. Voidable adoption: (1) If an adoptive person fails to fulfill the
obligations referred to in Section 181, any adopted son or daughter
may have the adoption annulled.
Provided that if such adopted son or daughter has already
received a partition share, he or she shall not be entitled to have the
adoption annulled.
An adoptive person may have the adoption annulled in
any of the following circumstances:
If the adopted son or daughter fails to fulfill the
obligations referred to in Section 182,
If the adopted son or daughter expels him or her
from home or subjects him or her to physical or
mental torture, from time to time,
If the adopted son or daughter misuses his or her
property,
If the adopted son or daughter leaves him or her and
lives separately without his or her consent for three
years or more.
The provisions of clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (2)
shall not apply to the married adopted daughter.
186. Termination of adoption: (1) If adoption is annulled pursuant to

Section 184 or 185, the relationship between the adoptive person
and the adopted son or daughter shall be deemed to have been
terminated.
If the relationship between the adoptive person and the
adopted son or daughter is terminated pursuant to sub-section (1),
the entitlements, rights and obligations vested in him or her in the
capacity of adopted son or daughter shall also be terminated.
Provided that no facilities already enjoyed, rights acquired or
exercised and obligations fulfilled in the capacity of adopted son or
daughter during the validity period of adoption shall be prejudiced.
187. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year
after the date on which such an act was done or an action was taken.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Inter-Country Adoption
188. Inter-country adoption deemed to be accepted: If any foreigner
accepts a minor of a Nepali citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in
Nepal as an adopted son or daughter, it shall be deemed to be
accepted as an inter-country adoption.
189. Adoption not to be effected without obtaining permission: (1)
No foreigner shall be allowed to hold any minor of a Nepali citizen
or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal as an adopted son or daughter,
without obtaining permission from the Government of Nepal.
Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only to the citizens or married couple of those countries
which are opened by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in
the Nepal Gazette, for inter-country adoption in Nepal.
190. Best interests of minor to be ensured in granting permission for
adoption: (1) Prior to granting permission to a foreigner for
adoption, the Government of Nepal shall consider whether or not
the best interests of the child will be ensured, his or her human
rights will be protected and such a child will be abducted, sold,
trafficked or otherwise abused.
Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only if, upon considering the matters pursuant to subsection (1), it appears appropriate to grant permission to a foreigner
to adopt a child.
191. Child eligible to be given for adoption: Any of the following
children having stayed in a children home for at least six months
may be given to a foreigner for adoption:
Orphan children who, upon death of both father and
mother, are not under protection of any one,
Voluntarily abandoned children.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"Children home" means a child welfare home and
orphanage established in accordance with law, with the
objective of protecting the rights and interests of
children, and this term includes a children home or
Balmandir established by the Government of Nepal.
"Orphan child" means any of the following child
certified as an orphan by the District Administration
Office:
A child found unclaimed by the police,
and whose father or mother is not found,
A child left unclaimed in a hospital or
health institution,
A child whose father and mother are not
traced out,
A child whose father and mother are both
dead and who has no property for
maintenance.
"Voluntarily abandoned children" means the following
children who have been surrendered to the custody of a
children home, through the District Administration
Office, by the following person, upon being unable to
arrangements
their
maintenance
education, by executing a deed relating thereto:
(a) In the case of a child whose father is dead or
disappeared and mother has concluded
another marriage, such a mother,
(b) If more than one child have born, and the
mother is not financially able to afford their
maintenance or education because the father
is dead, disappeared or of unsound mind, in
the case of such children, their mother,
(c) If more than one child have born, and the
father is not financially able to afford their
maintenance or education because the mother
is dead, disappeared or of unsound mind, in
the case of such children, their father,
(d) In the case of an orphan child who has no
property, his or her guardian or curator.
192. Foreigner eligible for adopting son or daughter: (1) Permission
may be granted to the following foreigner for the adoption of any
child of a Nepali citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal:
A couple from whom no child is born even up to ten
years of their marriage,
An unmarried woman a widow, divorcee woman or a
judicially separated woman who has completed fortyfive but not fifty-five years of age, having no son or
daughter,
An unmarried man a widower, divorcee or a judicially
separated man who has completed forty-five but not
fifty-five years of age, having no son or daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no permission may be granted to the following foreigner for
adoption:
One who is of unsound mind,
One who is convicted of a criminal offense involving
moral turpitude, by a court of Nepal or the concerned
country.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the law of a foreign country provides that a citizen of that
country may adopt more than one child, he or she may adopt a child
despite that he or she has a child.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a person of the country that prohibits a Nepali citizen from
adopting a child or provides discrimination between the rights of an
adopted son or a daughter and the rights of naturally born son or
daughter shall not be permitted to adopt a child from Nepal.
193. Provision relating to Inter-country Adoption Board: (1) The
Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
form an Inter-country Adoption Board so as to act as the central
agency for the purpose of making recommendation for granting
permission to a foreigner for adoption of a child pursuant to this
Chapter or designate any government body to perform such
function.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"Board" means the Inter-country Adoption Board, and this term
includes the government body designated to perform such function.
The Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall be so
formed as to include one child right worker who has worked in the
field of the rights of the child for at least fifteen years.
Other functions, powers and duties of the Board, in
addition to those mentioned elsewhere in this Chapter, shall be as
follows:
To frame policies on inter-country adoption and
recommend the same to the Government of Nepal,
To make coordination between the various
agencies on matters of inter-country adoption,
To prevent undue financial and other advantage
likely to be exchanged while giving or taking
adoption,
To make available any information required by the
central adoption agencies or other relevant public
agencies of other countries about the condition of
adopted sons or daughters,
To prevent child abuse, exploitation, trafficking or
kidnapping likely to happen in effecting adoption
and to protect Nepali children from any other
practice likely to harm them,
To make recommendation to the Government of
Nepal to fix the charges applicable for adoption,
To specify the form of application to be filed for
adoption,
arrangements
maintaining
confidentiality of records of the minors desirous to
be adopted, their biological father and mother or
adoptive father and mother,
To carry out such other functions relating to intercountry adoption as may be required.
Other matters including the procedures relating to the
meeting of the Board shall be as determined by the Board itself.
194. Application to be filed for adoption: (1) A foreigner or couple
qualified under Section 192 and desirous of adopting a Nepali
minor or a minor of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal shall make an
application to the Board, accompanied by the following documents,
through the embassy of his or her country in Nepal and where no
such an embassy is situated in Nepal, the embassy designated for
Nepal or the central agency of the concerned country which gives
permission for adoption:
The applicant's birth registration certificate,
The applicant's recently taken photograph,
A photocopy of the applicant's passport,
A document certifying the applicant’s marital
status,
A certificate issued by a licensed medical doctor
on the applicant’s health,
A certificate issued by the governmental body of
the concerned country, indicating that the
applicant is of good character and has not been
convicted by a court of a criminal charge
involving moral turpitude,
A document that certifies the applicant's property
and income source,
The applicant's social, psychological and home
study report,
Age, sex and other details of the child sought for
adoption,
A letter of consent issued by the government of
the applicant’s country for making adoption in
Nepal,
A letter of guarantee issued by the government of
the concerned country or by the embassy of that
country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal
indicating that according to the law of the
applicant’s home country, the status of the person
to be adopted is equal to that of the applicant’s
biological son or daughter,
A letter of guarantee issued by the government of
the applicant's home country, embassy of that
country based in Nepal or designated for Nepal
indicating that, according to the law of the
applicant’s home country, the applicant is
qualified to make adoption and has the financial
capacity to bear all responsibilities including
maintenance, health care, education and protection
of the minor to be adopted.
The documents referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
written in the English language or translated into the English or
Nepali language by a competent body.
If it is found, from an inquiry into the application
received pursuant to sub-section (1), that it is appropriate to grant
permission for adoption according to the applicant’s request, the
Board shall, by keeping confident the applicant’s name and address,
forward the details relating thereto to the selection committee.
The application to be made pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be accompanied by the application fee as determined by the
Government of Nepal, on the recommendation of the Board.
195. Provisions relating to selection committee: The Government of
Nepal shall form a selection committee, by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette, for the purpose of making recommendations to the
Board as to which of minors may be appropriate for adoption by
any foreigner or foreign couple, after selecting the person or couple
desirous of making adoption, and the minor.
196. To make recommendation by selecting person effecting
adoption and child: The Board shall, based on the minor’s details
according to the applicant’s details and relevant matters received
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 194, and also having regard
to the applicant’s request, ascertain what type of minor is
appropriate for being adopted by which applicant and recommend
the name of the applicant and the minor to the Board.
197. Permission to be granted for adoption: (1) If the Board considers,
from an inquiry into the recommendation received from the
selection committee pursuant to Section 196, that it is appropriate to
grant a minor as recommended for adoption by a foreigner, it shall
make according recommendation to the Government of Nepal.
If, upon an inquiry into the recommendation made by
the Board pursuant to sub-section (1), it thinks reasonable to do so,
the Government of Nepal shall, according to the recommendation of
the Board, grant permission for the adoption of such a minor by the
foreigner.
After permission has been granted pursuant to subsection (2), the Government of Nepal shall issue a certificate
relating thereto for that purpose.
After the certificate has been issued pursuant to subsection (3), inter-country adoption shall be deemed to have duly
been effected from Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if, prior to granting permission for the adoption of any minor by a
foreigner, the father, mother or other guardian of the minor desires
to take his or her minor back, such a minor may not be granted for
adoption.
If the Government of Nepal grants permission for the
adoption of any minor by a foreigner pursuant to sub-section (2),
the applicant shall appear in person and take over the concerned
minor.
Provided that if the applicant is a couple and either of them is
unable to appear in person, the other spouse may take over such a
minor on the basis of the certified deed of consent executed by the
absent spouse.
After permission has been granted for the adoption of
any minor by a foreigner pursuant to this Section, the Government
of Nepal shall give information thereof to the central agency
responsible for inter-country adoption situated in the country of the
adoptive person and also to the embassy of the concerned country
designated for Nepal, if any.
A foreigner or couple making application for adoption
may, if not satisfied with any decision made by the Government of
Nepal, make an appeal to the concerned High Court.
198. Special provision relating to selection of families for minors in
need of special care: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, the Board may accord priority to those
applicants who have applied for the adoption of minors in need of
special care and select families to that effect.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“minors in need of special care” means those minors, out of orphan
minors or voluntarily abandoned minors, who are in need of special
care due to physical or mental condition, unusual or abnormal
growth or more age.
The Board shall determine as to whether any minor is a
minor in need of special care or not.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if, in selecting the families and the minors in need of special care
pursuant to that sub-section, any detail relating to the age, sex and
health of the minor as demanded by a family in the first order of
priority does not match, those minors in need of special care who
match to the details as demanded by such family may be selected
respectively.
The other procedures on the selection of families for
minors in need of special care and classification of such minors
shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
199. Special provision relating to permission to be granted for
adoption: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, if any renowned foreign citizen desires to adopt any minor
as referred to in Section 191, he or she may make an application to
the Board, along with a formal recommendation by the head of state,
head of government or foreign minister of the concerned country.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“renowned foreign citizen” means any of the following persons:
Head of state or head of government of a foreign
country,
Chief of an international intergovernmental
organization,
A laureate of the noble prize,
A person or entrepreneur who has an income of
more than three hundred thousand US Dollars a
year.
If the Board considers, from an inquiry into an
application received pursuant to sub-section (1), that it is reasonable
to grant a minor as demanded by such a foreign citizen for adoption,
it shall make recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council
of Ministers, accordingly.
If a recommendation is made pursuant to sub-section
(2), the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers may give
permission to such a foreign citizen to adopt the minor demanded
by him or her.
Any foreign citizen making adoption pursuant to this
Section shall, upon making such adoption, comply with the other
provisions set forth in this Chapter.
200. Details to be forwarded: A foreigner who makes adoption
pursuant to this Chapter shall each year forward details relating to
arrangements
maintenance(palanposhan), education, health and care of(herchaha)
the adopted minor until such minor attains the age of majority
according to the law of the concerned country, in each six months
for a period of two years and thereafter in each year to the
Government of Nepal through the Nepali Embassy or Consulate
based in his or her country or Nepali mission abroad, and if such
mission is not situated there, through the Embassy of Nepal related
to such a country.
201. To monitor: (1) The Board may itself monitor as to whether a
foreigner who has adopted a Nepali minor has made arrangements
for the maintenance (Palanposhan), health, education and care of
(Herchaha) such minor until the minor attains the age of majority,
or for that purpose, form, as per necessity, a sub-committee
consisting also of a representative of the Nepali Embassy or
Consulate based in the concerned country.
The Board or sub-committee referred to in sub-section
(1) may, for that purpose, carry out monitoring by visiting the place
where the child is residing.
The Board or sub-committee shall submit a report of
monitoring conducted by it under sub-section (2) to the
Government of Nepal.
The report referred to in sub-section (3) shall contain,
inter alia, a statement whether the best interests of the adopted
Nepali minor have been served when he or she is residing with the
adoptive person or not.
If the report received pursuant to sub-section (3)
contains a statement that the best interests of the adopted Nepali
minor have not been served when he or she is residing with the
adoptive person, the Government of Nepal shall, also taking
opinion of the concerned minor if her or she is able to express his or
her opinion or is above ten years of age, bring that matter to the
attention of the Government of the concerned country through the
diplomatic channel.
If the condition of the adopted Nepali minor is not
improved even after the attention drawn pursuant to sub-section (5),
the Government of Nepal shall, by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, remove such a country from the list of countries opened
for their citizens to make inter-country adoption from Nepal.
202. Case may be filed: A case may be filed in the court of the
concerned country for the annulment of adoption, by a minor
adopted as an adopted son or daughter within one year after the date
on which the minor attained majority, on the grounds of failure to
make arrangements for proper maintenance(Palanposhan), health,
education and care of (Herchaha) him or her, and by the Nepali
Embassy or Consulate based in the country where the adopted son
or daughter is residing within one year after the date on which the
adoptive person failed to make such arrangements.
203. Provisions of the Act to be applicable: (1) Provisions
contained
in Sections 173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181 and 183 in relation to
adopted sons or daughters shall also apply to the sons or daughters
adopted by foreigners pursuant to this Chapter.
Provision of Section 191 shall not apply for the
adoption of the minors of foreigners domiciled in Nepal.
Government
Nepal
recommendation of the Board, make necessary Guidelines for the
implementation of the provisions contained in this Chapter.
204. Statute of limitation: If a separate statute of limitation for making
a lawsuit is specified in this Chapter, the lawsuit may be made
accordingly, and if such statute of limitation is not specified, a
person aggrieved from any act committed or action taken under this
Chapter may make a lawsuit within one year after the date on which
such an act was done or action was taken.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Partition
205. To be deemed coparcener: For the purposes of apportionment of a
property in common, the husband, wife, father, mother, son and
daughter shall be deemed to be coparceners, subject to the other
Sections of this Chapter.
206. Equal entitlement to partition share: (1) Each coparcener shall
have equal entitlement to partition share.
If a woman coparcener is pregnant at the time of
partition, and the baby to be delivered by her is to become a
coparcener, partition shall be made by treating also such would be
born baby as a coparcener and only after setting aside his or her
partition share of property.
If the pregnant woman under sub-section (2) does not
deliver a live baby, the partition share set aside for such a baby
shall be divided equally between the other coparceners.
207. Son and daughter born from couple whose matrimonial
relationship is dissolved to obtain partition share: A son and
daughter born to a couple who cannot conclude a marriage or
whose marriage cannot be considered valid or whose matrimonial
relationship is dissolved according to law shall obtain their partition
share from such a father and mother.
208. To obtain partition share from mother: (1) A son and daughter
whose father is not traced out shall obtain their partition share from
the property belonging to their mother only.
A wife kept without making public or a son and
daughter born from her shall not be entitled to claim a partition
share after the death of the husband or father.
209. To obtain partition share from part of father or husband: (1) A
son and daughter child or wives of brothers living in an undivided
family shall obtain partition share only from the part of their
respective father or husband, as the case may be.
If the husband, father or mother dies before effecting
partition, his wife or his or her child shall obtain the partition share
to which the husband, father or mother is entitled.
If a person has more than one wife, they shall obtain
their respective partition share only from the part of the husband.
210. Latter wife or child to obtain partition share from part of
husband or father: (1) If a person concludes another marriage or a
child is born from the wife so married, after effecting partition
between his wife, son, daughter or while he is living together with
such a wife, son, daughter after mixing his partition share with that
of them, such a wife, son or daughter shall obtain her or his
partition share only from the part of the property of the husband or
father, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, if a person whose wife is surviving concludes another
marriage before effecting partition, the partition shares of the other
coparcener shall first be set aside and the woman who is so married
shall be provided with a partition share from the part to which he is
entitled.
211. Right to obtain partition share: (1) A
husband,
wife,
father,
mother, son and daughter having property in common shall make,
according to their reputation and income, arrangements for the
maintenance and medical treatment of the wife, husband, son,
daughter, father and mother, as the case may be.
If a person who is bound to make arrangements as
referred to in sub-section (1) fails to make such arrangements, the
coparcener is entitled to get separated by obtaining his or her
partition share.
212. Separation may be effected at anytime: (1) If there is a mutual
agreement between the coparcener, they may get separated at any
time by obtaining their respective partition share.
If the husband, father, mother or person acting as the
head of family considers it appropriate for the coparcener to obtain
their respective partition share and get separated rather than living
in a single family, the coparcener may get separated by effecting
partition at any time.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term “person
acting as the head of family” means a person who has attained the
age of majority pursuant to law and acts as the head of family or
who has the responsibility to run the household affairs living in the
joint family by engaging in farming, trade, business or any other
work in various places.
213. Husband or wife may get separated by obtaining partition
share: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 211, the
husband or wife may, in any of the following circumstances, get
separated at any time by obtaining his or her partition share:
If the husband or wife expels the wife or husband
from the house,
If the husband or wife causes physical or mental
torture to the wife or husband.
214. Widow may effect separation by taking her partition share: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a
widow may get separated at any time by taking her partition share.
If a widow concludes another marriage, the property
obtained by her by way of partition share shall devolve on the son
and daughter, if any, born to her from the previous husband and, if
there is no such a son or daughter, she herself may retain such
property.
215. Relinquishment of partition share: (1) Any coparcener may, by
executing a deed to that effect, relinquish his or her partition share,
with or without taking his or her partition share in part or taking
some cash or kind only in consideration for his or her partition
share.
While executing a deed on relinquishment of partition
share pursuant to sub-section (1), if a coparcener has husband, wife,
or son or daughter having attained the age of majority, the deed on
relinquishment of partition share shall be deemed to have been
executed only when consent of such a husband, wife, son or
daughter has been obtained.
Provided that the entitlement of a minor coparcener to
partition share may not be relinquished.
If a deed on relinquishment of partition share is
executed pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be deemed as if he or
she received his or her partition share.
A coparcener shall have to appear in person for
executing a deed on relinquishment of partition share or for
receiving his or her partition share.
Provided that if a coparcener is not able to appear in person,
he or she shall, for that purpose, appoint an authorized attorney in
accordance with law.
216. Partition to be effected: (1) In partitioning a property in common,
a deed of partition shall be executed in writing between the
coparceners, subject to this Chapter.
In effecting partition pursuant sub-section (1), partition
of property in common and debts in common shall be so made that
partition shares thereof are equal.
Explanation: For the purposes of his Chapter, the term
"debts in common" means any debts agreed to by the person acting
as the head of family or by all coparceners or borrowed by the
coparceners, who have attained the age of majority and live in the
undivided family and carry on household work, farming, trade or
any other work in various places or incurred in such transaction or
incurred in transaction carried on by the other persons, who have
attained the age of majority and live in the undivided family as to
which such persons have consented in writing.
Partition shall be effected by balancing both high value
and less value properties, with the consent of all the coparceners,
and failing such consent, by a lottery.
If, in effecting partition, there arises a dispute on any
property, partition shall be effected after the settlement of the
dispute.
Provided that if it takes a long time for the settlement of such
a dispute, the property in dispute may be kept as undivided property
and the other properties may be partitioned.
217. Matters to be specified in deed of partition: The following
matters shall be specified in the deed of partition:
Name, surname, age, address of every coparcener
and that of his or her mother, father, grand-father
and grand-mother,
Property to be received by the coparceners,
If the part of a coparcener involves debts, moneys
receivable, amount of such debts and moneys,
If, upon partition, any coparcener is to live with
another coparcener, that details thereof,
A matter to the effect that no coparcener has hidden
or concealed any property subject to partition,
If any property is to devolve on a coparcener only,
upon the death of the father, mother, husband or
wife, details thereof,
If the partition share of any coparcener is to be
entrusted to any one, details thereof,
Other necessary matters.
218. Deed of partition to be registered: (1) In effecting partition, a
deed of partition shall be drawn up in presence of witnesses, bear
signature and thumb-impression of the witness and the coparcener
and registered in the concerned office, having duly fulfilled the
legal requirements.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
in cases where partition was effected in household making a
balance between highly valuable and less valuable property,
whether or not executing a deed of partition between any
coparceners before 10 January 1978 (27 Poush 2034) and a
coparcener has already taken his or her partition share and effected
transmission thereof or the coparceners have individually possessed
or sold or transacted their respective partition share of immovable
property according to partition, partition shall be deemed to have
been effected in spite of being the deed of partition not registered.
219. Prohibition of providing property without effecting partition:
No person acting as the head of family shall, without effecting
partition, provide a property in common to only a coparcener who
has not taken partition share or who would be a coparcener.
Provided that-
That such a person may, with the consent of all the
coparceners, provide any property to any coparcener.
That such a person may, even without consent of the
other coparceners, provide the property to the extent
of his or her partition share, to any coparcener.
In effecting partition pursuant to this Chapter, the other
property shall be partitioned by setting off the property provided to
a coparcener pursuant to clause (1) of the proviso to sub-section (1)
for the partition share to which the coparcener is entitled.
220. Lawsuit to be filed by setting out inventory of property: (1) If a
coparcener is desirous of getting separated by setting aside his or
her partition share, he or she shall file a lawsuit, specifying therein
the date of separation of bread and board from the other
coparceners and setting out an inventory of such property and debts
and assets held in his or her name and that of the other coparceners,
to the best of his or her knowledge, as is liable to partition.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "date
of separation of bread and board" means the following date or day:
The date mentioned in the deed of separation of
bread and board,
If there is no deed of separation of bread and
board,
agreed
between
coparceners on the separation of bread and board,
If no agreement is reached between the
coparceners pursuant to clause (b), the day
immediately before the day of filing a lawsuit,
Except as otherwise agreed upon, in the case of a
married daughter, the day of her marriage.
If the deed of separation of bread and board is executed
between any coparceners only, such a deed shall come into force
only on the date of its registration.
If the person filing a lawsuit pursuant to sub-section (1)
is unable to submit the inventory of property, he or she shall also
specify the reason therefor.
If a lawsuit is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned person also shall submit a statement of defense, together
with a statement whether the plaintiff is to be provided with a
partition share or not and if he or she agrees to provide a partition
share, together with an inventory of the property held in his or her
name and the debts and assets.
221. Matters to be set out in inventory: (1) The following matters shall
be set out in the inventory of the property to be submitted pursuant
to this Chapter:
The place of location of land, plot No., area and
approximate value thereof,
In the case of a house, place of location, plot no,
area, Kabal (rooms), Naal (size), storey of the
house, whether it is concretely built or mud made,
and approximate value thereof,
In the case of a movable property, details and
approximate value thereof,
In the case of cash, details thereof, and also details
of bank balance, share, debenture, treasury bills, if
In the case of livestock, details and approximate
value thereof,
In the case of gold, silver and jewelries, details and
approximate value thereof,
In the case of a motor vehicle, details and
approximate value thereof,
Details and approximate value of the properties, if
any, other than those referred to clauses (a) through
If the value of any property is not set out pursuant to
sub-section (1) or a dispute arises as to the value thereof, the court
shall take the basis of the price fixed by the Land Revenue Office,
in the case of an immovable property, and of the prevailing market
price for the time being, in the case of a movable property.
222. Partition to be effected by taking inventory: (1) If it appears from
the lawsuit filed or statement of defense submitted pursuant to

Section 220 that partition requires to be effected and an inventory
of property is submitted along with the lawsuit or statement of
defense, the court shall effect partition, having the coparceners
executed a deed stating, inter alia, that the property they have
submitted is the only property to be partitioned and that they have
not concealed or hidden any other property.
If an inventory of property is not submitted along with
the lawsuit or statement of defense, the court shall, by specifying a
time-limit, require the coparceners to submit the inventory of the
property and effect partition by causing the coparceners to execute
a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), if the coparceners submit such
an inventory within the time-limit so specified.
223. Partition to be effected on the basis of inventory received: (1) If
a person who into submit an inventory of property within the timelimit referred to in Section 222 fails to submit the inventory or has
elapsed the time-limit without submitting a statement of defense,
the court shall effect partition on the basis of the inventory of the
property submitted by other coparceners.
If the partition is effected pursuant to sub-section (1),
no lawsuit may be entertained on the ground of dissatisfaction with
the partition share.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if a lawsuit is filed for the partition of a property not set out in the
inventory of the property submitted by the coparceners but
discovered subsequently, the court shall effect partition of that
property.
224. Power to take inventory by breaking padlock: If, because of the
failure of a person to submit an inventory of the property required
to be submitted by him or her, the inventory of property has to be
taken by breaking the padlock of the house custody of which is
taken by him or her, the court may, by opening the padlock in
presence also of the person holding the key of the house, if he or
she is present, and if not, in presence of at least two persons
including the person requesting for partition share and a
representative of the concerned ward of the Local Level, take an
inventory of the property found there, by maintaining a record
thereof.
225. Partition to be effected when inventory produced: (1) If the
person who has to submit an inventory fails to submit the inventory
or lapses the time-limit by not submitting a statement of defense
and the person filing a lawsuit requesting for the partition of
property also fails to submit the inventory of property, the court
shall, by causing the person filing the lawsuit to execute a deed of
the same statement, abate the lawsuit subject to the condition that
the partition shall be effected at the time when an inventory of the
property is produced.
If a lawsuit is abated pursuant to sub-section (1) and
the person filing the lawsuit makes a petition subsequently,
accompanied by an inventory, the court shall effect partition
between the coparceners in accordance with law, on the basis of the
previous case-file itself.
226. Prohibition of concealing or hiding property: (1) No person shall
conceal or hide a property that is liable to partition.
If a coparcener is subsequently held to have concealed
or hidden any property which is held in his or her name and is liable
to partition, at the time of effecting partition or at the time when
asked by the court to submit an inventory, the coparcener so
concealing or hiding the property shall have no right to obtain such
property.
The property concealed or hidden under sub-section (2)
shall be partitioned between the other coparceners.
227. Partition share to be reimbursed: If a coparcener is not allowed
to own and possess any property falling in his or her partition share
due to the property being defective under law, all the coparceners
shall proportionately reimburse to him or her property equal to the
defective property.
228. Partition share not to be exchanged: Except in the case of mutual
consent among the coparceners, no coparcener shall be entitled to
exchange any property received by him or her by way of partition
for the reason that after partition it is disordered, damaged or he or
she does not prefer it.
229. Partition of pledged or mortgaged property: (1) If a coparcener
is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property that is liable to
partition, the court shall, if all the coparceners so agree, effect
partition of the property by causing the property to be released from,
or on the condition of having an obligation to release it from, the
property in common.
If all the coparceners do not agree pursuant to subsection (1) and the court finds that the person acting as the head of
family has pledged or mortgaged the property or that the other
persons having attained majority living in the undivided family
have, taking signature and thumb-impression also of the person
acting as the head of family, pledged or mortgaged it, the court
shall effect partition of the property by causing the property to be
released from, or on the condition of having an obligation to release
it from, the property in common.
Save in the cases referred to in sub-section (1) or (2), if
a coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property
liable to partition, the court shall effect partition by causing the
property to be released from, or on the condition of having an
obligation to release it from, the property falling in his or her
partition share.
230. Power to withhold property or income until partition is
effected: If one filing a lawsuit appears to obtain a partition share
in a case of partition and, after the inventory of property has been
submitted, makes a petition to the court, praying that the property to
the extent of his or her partition share or income thereof be
withheld, the court may withhold the property to the extent of his or
her partition share or income of such property until partition is
effected in the fulfillment of the legal requirements.
231. Partition to be so effected as to have provision of way or
passage: While effecting partition, if there is no access to way or
passage to a house or land partitioned to a coparcener and if such
way or passage can be managed from the land of other coparcener,
partition shall be so effected that the concerned coparcener shall
have to provide the way or passage for access to such house or land.
232. Debtor not to be specified without consent of creditor: (1)
Partition shall not be so effected as to give the responsibility of
payment of the debt of joint family to a sole coparcener without
consent of the creditor.
Even if the responsibility of payment of the debt is
given solely to any coparcener contrary to sub-section (1), all the
coparceners shall pay the debt in common equally, if the creditor
does not so agree.
233. Compensation to be paid if lawsuit filed by person not entitled
to partition: If a person who is not entitled to receive a partition
share is held to have filed a lawsuit for receiving it, the court shall
order the law-suit filing person to pay to the defendant a reasonable
compensation, having regard to the amount in controversy, if set
out from the case-file, and if such amount is not set out, to the
status of such a person.
234. Partition share, money or expenditure may be awarded: (1) If a
person who is entitled to obtain a partition share, money or
expenditure from any person according to the judgment, files,
having failed to so receive, a petition in the court of first instance
which has passed judgment in the case, the court shall, if the parties
are the same, cause the partition, money or expenditure according
to the judgment to be awarded as soon as possible.
If the partition share, expenditure or money is not
provided pursuant to sub-section (1), the person who has to provide
the partition share, money or expenditure shall be caused to pay a
reasonable compensation as well to the petitioner.
235. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit as
follows:
Any time, where partition has never been effected
or a common general deed has been executed in
effecting partition and even though there is no deed
where both the parties have enjoyed the property
upon making calculation,
Within three months from the date of partition if
one is not satisfied with such partition,
In case of concealing or hiding of property, till the
life of the concerned coparcener,
In the cases other than that referred to in clauses (a),
(b) and (c), within six months after the date on
which such an act was done or action taken.
236. Partition deemed to be executed: (1) A partition effected pursuant
to the law prior to the commencement of this Act shall be deemed
to have been effected pursuant to this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person has taken maintenance for living (Jiuni) in consideration
for his or her partition share prior to the commencement of this Act,
the person shall be deemed to have taken his or her partition share.

Chapter-11
Provisions Relating to Succession
237. Succession deemed to be opened: Upon the death of a person,
succession to his or her property shall be deemed to be opened.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"succession" means devolution of liabilities and rights in regard to
debt, wealth and property of the deceased upon his or her heirs in
accordance with law.
238. Heir entitled to succession: Where succession to a person's
property is opened, his or her nearest heir shall be entitled to such
succession.
239. Order of preference of heirs for succession: (1) The order of
preference of nearest heirs for succession shall, subject to the other
Sections of this Chapter, be as follows:
Husband or wife living in the undivided family,
Son, daughter, widow daughter-in-law living in the
undivided family,
Father, mother, step mother, grand-son, granddaughter, grand-daughter-in-law, on the side of son
or daughter, living in the undivided family,
Separated husband, wife, son, daughter, father,
mother, step-mother,
Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from the son's
generation,
Separated grand-father, grand-mother,
Grand-father, grand-mother, elder brother, younger
brother, elder sister, younger sister, widow elder
brother’s wife or younger brother’s wife living in
the undivided family,
Uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, living in the joint
family,
Separated elder brother, younger brother, elder
sister, younger sister, widow elder brother's wife or
younger brother's wife.
So long as the person who is in the first order of
preference referred to in sub-section (1) at the time when
succession to one’s property is open is serving the person in the
subsequent order of preference shall not be entitled to succession.
If there are more than one heir in the same order of
preference pursuant to sub-section (1), all of them shall equally be
entitled to the succession.
If any heir in the order of preference entitled to
succession does not intend to succeed, the other heirs in the same
order shall be entitled to succession, and even any heir in that order
of preference does not intend to accept succession, the heir in the
successive order of preference shall be entitled to the succession.
240. Distant heir entitled to succession: If a person dies when he or she
was staying with any distant heir after taking his or her partition
share of property in spite of having his or her nearer heir and
succession to him or her is open, the heir with whom that person
was so staying shall be entitled to his or her property succession.
241. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar) and caretaking heir entitled to
succession: If a nearer heir has not maintained and taken care of a
person but a distant heir has done so, the distant heir who has so
maintained and taken care of him or her shall be entitled to
succession.
242. Separated heir entitled to succession: (1) If a person dies when
that person was staying with any heir who has lived separately,
after taking his or her partition share of property, because an unseparated heir has not maintained (Shyahar samhar) and taken care
of that person, such separated heir shall be entitled to the succession
of that person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person dies when that person was staying with any heir only for
few days, without taking his or her partition share of property, the
heir with whom that person had so stayed shall not be entitled to
succession of that person.
243. Maintaining (Shyahar samhar) and caretaking person entitled
to succession: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, if another person has maintained (Shyahar samhar)
and taken care of the deceased because the heir has not done so, the
person who has so maintained (Shyahar samhar) and taken care of
shall be entitled to such succession.
244. Not to be obliged to accept succession: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no person shall be
obliged to accept a succession.
A person who declines to accept a succession shall
give information thereof in writing to the concerned District Court
within a period of three years of the devolution of succession.
If a person does not accept a succession within the
period referred to in sub-section (2), such succession shall be
deemed to have been devolved upon the other heir in the successive
order of preference for succession.
Even if a person does not accept a succession pursuant
to sub-section (1), he or she shall have to conduct obsequies of the
deceased in accordance with the rites and rituals.
245. Disqualified for succession: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person who kills, or causes the death
of, another person with intent to serve any premeditation or with
ulterior motive to obtain succession, such person and the heir to the
person who so kills or causes death shall be disqualified from the
succession of the deceased or his or her heir.
246. Obligations and rights of person upon whom succession is
devolved: (1) The obligations and rights of the person upon whom
succession is devolved shall be as follows:
To perform, or cause to be performed, funeral and
obsequies rites of the deceased according to his or
her rites and rituals,
To repay the debt borrowed by the deceased to the
creditor,
To have right over the debt lent and investment
made by the deceased.
If the funeral and obsequies rites of a deceased has
been performed by a person other than one who is entitled to the
succession, the person so entitled shall pay the costs incurred in the
performance of funeral and obsequies rites of the deceased and
additional twenty-five percent of such costs to the person who has
performed such rites.
Provided that if any person has, instead of doing on his or her
own, caused another person to perform the funeral and obsequies
rites of the deceased, he or she shall be liable to pay only the actual
costs incurred in the performance of such rites.
247. Creditor may recover debt: If succession to one’s property is
opened and one has creditors, such creditors may recover their
debts and liabilities from the person upon whom succession has
devolved.
Provided that no heir shall be obliged to pay debts and liabilities
in excess of the deceased's property succeeded to by him or her.
248. Local Level to receive property under succession: (1) If
succession to the property of a person is opened and he or she has
no heir or his or her heir declines to accept such succession, the
property of the dead person remaining after deducting the costs
incurred in the performance of his or her funeral and obsequies rites
and even after payment of debts due to his or her creditors shall be
devolved on the Local Level.
If a person dies and has no heir but has property, a
person who performs his or her obsequies or maintains his or her
books and accounts shall immediately give a notice thereof to the
Local Level.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (2), the
Local Level shall prepare an inventory of the properties of the
deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the
inventory, accompanied by a copy of the memorandum (Muchulka)
executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative
office.
If a memorandum, along with the inventory of
properties, is received pursuant to sub-section (3) and the address of
the deceased is traced out, such an office shall send a notice in
accordance with law to the heir of the deceased to appear to receive
the property of the deceased within a period of three months.
If the heir does not accept the property pursuant to subsection (1) or the heir of the deceased does not appear within the
time-limit referred to in sub-section (4) or the address of such heir
is not traced out, such an office shall publish a notice in a national
newspaper, inviting his or her heir, if any, to appear to claim the
property of the deceased, within a period of thirty five days.
If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (5), the property that remains after
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in the performance of
obsequies of the deceased or providing such expenses to the person
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property,
shall be returned to the concerned heir.
If no heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (5) or his or her address is not traced out,
the property that remains after deducting therefrom the expenses
incurred in the performance of obsequies of the deceased, which
amount is to be provided to the person having performed such
obsequies, shall devolve on the concerned Local Level.
The concerned heir or the office under sub-section (3)
shall hand over the property receivable by the Local Level pursuant
to sub-section (1) or (7) to the Local Level in accordance with law.
The Local Level shall use the property that it has
received pursuant to this Section for public interest.
249. Succession to property of foreigner died in Nepal: (1) If a
foreigner who dies in Nepal has property without heir in Nepal, a
person who performs his or her obsequies or maintains his or her
books and accounts shall immediately give a notice thereof to the
nearby Local Level.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Local Level shall prepare an inventory of the properties of the
deceased in witness of at two local persons and forward the
inventory, accompanied by a copy of the memorandum (Muchulka)
executed to that effect, to the concerned district level administrative
office.
If a memorandum, along with the inventory of
properties, is received pursuant to sub-section (2), such an office
shall immediately give information thereof to the Federal Ministry
of Home Affairs.
If information referred to in sub-section (3) is received,
the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs shall also send a notice, in
accordance with law, through the diplomatic channel of the
concerned country, to the heir of the dead person to appear to
receive the properties of the deceased within four months.
If information under sub-section (3) is received upon
the death of a citizen of a country having no diplomatic relation
with Nepal, the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs shall publish a
notice in a national daily English newspaper for receiving such
property within six months, and the Federal Ministry of Home
Affairs shall also put such notice on its website.
If the heir of the deceased appears within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (4) or (5), the property that remains after
deducting therefrom the expenses incurred in the performance of
obsequies of the dead person or providing such expenses the person
having performed such obsequies, and ten percent of the property,
shall be returned to the concerned heir.
If no heir of the dead person appears within the timelimit referred to in sub-section (4) or (5) or his or her address is not
traced out, the property that remains after providing the expenses
incurred in the performance of obsequies of the deceased to the
person having performed such obsequies shall devolve on the Local
Level.
The property received by the Local Level pursuant to
this Section shall be used only for public interest.
250. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
limitation, if any, set forth elsewhere in this Chapter, and in the
other cases, within a period of three years after the date on which
the succession is opened.

Part-4
Laws Relating to Property

Chapter-1
General Provisions Relating to Property
251. Deemed to be property: Any cash, goods or work shall be deemed
to be a property if such cash, goods or action can be used or
transacted in or the title thereto can be transferred by way of
purchase, sale or otherwise or any benefit can be derived therefrom.
Explanation: Except otherwise provided for in this Act, the
term "goods" means a physical property capable of being purchased
or sold.
252. Property deemed to be in movable or immovable form: A
property shall be deemed to be in either movable or immovable
form irrespective of its physical or non-physical, tangible or
intangible form.
253. Property deemed to be immovable: (1) The following property
shall be deemed to be an immovable property:
A building or land or structure fixed thereto,
Any goods attached to a building or land
permanently,
A mine, stone or mineral embedded in land,
Natural water, surface water and underground
water,
A building or other structure so made permanently
that it can float over a river, lake or pond,
A standing tree, plant or fruit tree or fruit or
flower growing on such a tree, plant or fruit tree or
crops in the land, or
A movable property attached to an immovable
property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any structure, goods or any part thereof, fixed or attached to any
immovable property gets or is detached or unfixed in any manner,
the structure, goods or part so detached or unfixed shall be deemed
to be a movable property.
254. Property deemed to be movable: The following property shall be
deemed to be a movable property:
Cash or goods that can be transacted as cash or foreign
currency,
Gold, silver, jewelry, Ratna, gold or silver ornament or
precious stone,
Other good that can be moved from one place to
another, except those referred in clause (a) or (b),
A bond, security, promissory note, bill of exchange,
letter of credit or other negotiable instrument or a
benefit derived therefrom,
Intellectual property,
A right in security,
A trade good-will or franchise,
A property other than the immovable property.
255. Classification of property according to ownership: The property
shall, according to the ownership and the form of use thereof be
classified as follows:
Private property,
Property in common,
Joint property,
Community property,
Public property,
Government property,
Trust property.
256. Property deemed to be private property: (1) Any of the
following properties owned by any person or properties accrued
therefrom shall be deemed to be a private property of such a person:
Property earned by way of his or her knowledge,
skills or effort,
Property acquired by way of donation, bequeath,
or succession,
Property acquired by way of a lottery or gift,
Property acquired by way of remuneration,
gratuity, pension, medical expense, provident fund,
insurance or other social security,
Property acquired by way of intellectual property
or royalty,
Property acquired in any manner whatsoever while
living apart by separating bread and board in
accordance with law or while managing one’s
accommodation at one’s cost despite not so living
apart,
Property earned or acquired by a woman prior to
marriage or acquired from her parental side at the
time of marriage or accrued therefrom,
Property so granted to a woman by the husband or
with consent of all coparceners of the husband
side that she will have exclusive right in it or
movable or immovable property received from the
relatives or friends of the husband side and
property accrued therefrom,
Property which, according to law, is considered to
be the exclusive private property of a person.
Any person shall be entitled to exclusively deal with
his or her private property, subject to this Act.
257. Property deemed to be property in common: (1) Any of the
following properties or property accrued therefrom shall be deemed
to be the property in common, irrespective of such property being
owned by any coparcener whosoever, out of the coparceners,
subject to Section 256:
Property inherited from ancestors,
Property owned by the coparceners except the private
property,
Property earned by the coparceners from the farming,
industry, trade or business in common or property
accrued therefrom.
Except where separated in accordance with law, any
property earned by the husband or wife or property accrued
therefrom shall be deemed to be the property in common of the
husband or wife.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, any property earned by the parents for the purpose of
partition between the parents and their children shall also be
deemed to be the property in common.
The use of, and transfer of right in, the property in
common and other provisions shall be as set forth in the other
Chapters of this Act.
258. Property deemed to be joint property: (1) Any property owned
by two or more persons except the coparceners living in a joint
family or property accrued therefrom shall be deemed to be a joint
property.
The right or share of a joint holder in the joint property
shall be as set forth in a deed setting out such rights and share, and
failing such a deed, the holders of that property shall be deemed to
have equal rights and share.
The use and management of, transfer of title to, and
other provisions relating to, the joint property shall be governed by
this Chapter and the other Chapters of this Act.
259. Trees, plants or goods on boundary to be deemed joint
property: Except as otherwise proved, the trees, plants or goods
lying on the boundary of two or more owners of adjoining lands
shall be deemed to be the joint property of all owners.
260. Management, protection and maintenance of joint property: (1)
The management, protection and maintenance of a joint property
shall be made as per the consent of the owners of that property.
Failing consent between the owners in relation to the
management, protection and maintenance of a joint property
pursuant to sub-section (1), the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property shall be made according to the
decision of majority members.
Failing a majority opinion between the owners in
relation to the management, protection and maintenance of the joint
property pursuant to sub-section (2), the owner who has the largest
right or share in that property shall make its management,
protection and maintenance.
Provided that if the owners have equal right, all owners shall
have to make management, protection and maintenance of such
property on an equal basis.
Expenses incurred in the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property, if any, made by any owner
pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3) shall be borne by all owners in
proportion to their respective right or share.
The owner who does not manage, protect and maintain
the joint property pursuant to sub-section (4) shall pay the expenses
incurred in the management, protection and maintenance of that
property to the owner who has made such management, protection
and maintenance within a period of one year.
If any owner fails to pay the expenses incurred in the
management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
within the period referred to in sub-section (5), the owner who has
made management, protection and maintenance thereof shall be
entitled to purchase the right and share of that other owner in that
property at the prevailing price. Such purchaser of the joint property
may deduct management and maintenance expenses of his or her
portion.
261. Prohibition of alteration in joint property without consent: Any
alteration in a joint property or any change in its form may not be
made without consent of all the owners of the joint property.
262. Legal action or defense may be made by any owner of joint
property: (1) If it is necessary to institute a legal action against any
person or defend a case in relation to the protection of a joint
property, all owners shall make such institution or defense.
If all owners are not available as referred to in subsection (1), any owner may, on behalf of him or her or the other
owners, institute legal action against any person or defend any case.
263. Separation of one’s share from joint property: (1) Any owner of
a joint property may separate his or her right or share therein from
the other owners at any time.
The separation of a joint property referred to in subsection (1) shall be effected in accordance with the consent of all
the owners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), if the separation of any joint property results either in a
substantial loss to the other owners or in a disorder in the form of
that property, such separation may not be made.
If any joint property cannot be separated owing to the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (3), the owners of that
property shall sell such property and divide the proceeds of sale
between them in proportion to their respective right and share
therein.
If any joint property cannot be sold in accordance with
sub-section (4) or all the owners do not agree to sell it and any
owner intends to buy such property, such an owner may exclusively
own it by paying the price of that property to the other owners in
the same proportion.
If more than one owner intend to buy the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (5), the owner who agrees to pay the highest
price shall be entitled to purchase such property.
264. Provisions relating to community, public, government and trust
properties: The provisions relating to, and ownership, use,
management, and transfer of right in, and other provisions of, the
community, public, government and trust properties shall be as set
forth in the other Chapters of this Act.
265. Statute of limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or
action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
taken.

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Ownership and Possession
266. Ownership to be deemed: If a person acquires the right in any
property in accordance with law, his or her ownership in that
property shall be deemed.
288. Right of owner: Any person, in capacity of the owner of any
property, shall have the following right, subject to laws:
To use the property,
To sell or otherwise transfer the title to the property to
any other person,
To mortgage or pledge the property in any manner,
To deal in the property,
To take benefits of the property in any manner
whatsoever,
To make any kind of physical structure, wall or fence
or delimit boundary, in his or her land or change the
form of any property or otherwise protect it,
To use his or her land or part below its surface or goods
therein or sky above its surface,
To destroy or dispose of property in any manner,
To institute a legal action in any manner in relation to
the acquisition or security of the property.
268. Possessory right to be deemed: If a person holds a property with
him or her lawfully with intention to possess the property, the
person shall be deemed to have the possessory right over such
property.
269. When possessory right can be acquired: (1) The possessory right
may be acquired over any property in the following manner:
By holding the property in the capacity of its owner,
By acquiring the property owned by another person, in
accordance with law,
By obtaining consent to have possessory right.
Only the possessory right which is acquired in good
faith, peacefully or openly shall be deemed to have been acquired
lawfully.
270. Person competent to acquire possessory right: (1) A person may
acquire the possessory right either in person or through his or her
agent.
A person who is incompetent or quasi-competent may
acquire the possessory right through his or her guardian or curator.
271. Rights of possessor: (1) A person, in the capacity of a possessor,
shall, subject to law, have the following rights:
To uninterruptedly possess the property in his or her
possession, subject to the laws in force or the contract,
if any, entered into in relation to the property,
To use any benefits of the property in his or her
possession.
In the event of acquisition of, by a person, the
possessory right in bona fide over any property owned by anyone
else, the person shall be entitled to reimbursement from the owner
of that property for essential expenses incurred in the management,
maintenance or care of (rekh dekh) such property while it was
under his or her possessory right.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the former possessor shall be entitled to retain such property with
him or her unless and until the expenses referred to in that subsection are reimbursed.
If a bona fide possessor of any property not in his or
her ownership has attached any goods to such property, the
possessor shall be entitled to detach or take out the goods so
attached by him or her from the property without tempering with
such property.
272. Circumstances when possessory right is extinguished: The
possessory right of a person over a property shall be deemed to
have been extinguished in any of the following circumstances:
If the person abandons the property,
If the person transfers the property,
If the property gets totally destroyed or becomes
useless.
273. Adverse possessory right to be deemed: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any person has
possessed any movable property or land owned by anyone else,
since more than three years ago in the case of the movable property
and thirty years ago in the case of the land as if the property or land
were owned by himself or herself, that person shall be deemed to
have adverse possessory right over such property or land.
Provided that:
No adverse possessory right may be acquired
over a government, public, community or trust
land despite the length of the period of
possession.
Where a contract or other law provides for
separate provisions in relation to any property or
land, such provisions shall be applicable to such
property or land.
If any person acquires the adverse possessory right
over any property pursuant to sub-section (1), the person may
obtain ownership over such property in his or her name.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a property or land is possessed without knowledge of its owner,
secretly or forcibly, this Section shall not apply.
In computing the period pursuant to this Section, it
shall be computed from the date of the commencement of this Act.
274. Compensation to be paid: (1) If
person
possesses
property forcibly, with mala fide intention or secretly, the person
shall return the benefits derived from that possession and such
property to the concerned person and pay a reasonable
compensation for any loss caused to the property due to his or her
negligence in the course of possessing such property.
If any property owned by anyone else is lost or
damaged during the continuance of the possessory right of a person
over the property, the person shall pay compensation for such
property to the concerned person.
275. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within three months after the date of knowledge of commission of
such act or action.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Uses of Property
276. Prohibition of use, temperance or acquisition of other's
property: (1) No person shall use other's property without consent
of that other person.
No person shall temper with other's property by closing
the road or exit of the other person or doing any act or construction
on the border of his or her land or otherwise.
No person shall acquire other's property without
consent of that person.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with law, acquire property of any person for public interest.
No person shall enter other's house and compound
without consent of any person except in accordance with law.
277. Property to be inviolable: (1) No person shall encroach or trespass
other's property by way of overlapping, pressing or otherwise.
If any person takes possession of other's property by
way of any act referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be
deemed to have encroached or trespassed such property.
278. Safety measures to be adopted: A person shall, while doing any
work on his or her house or land, adopt safety measures in order to
avoid any loss or damage or effect to the neighbor's house or land
in any manner.
Provided that, except where a business transaction is carried
on by any neighbor, matters such as gas, smell, smoke or noise of
general nature emitted or produced from the use by the neighbor of
his or her house or land shall not be deemed to have caused a loss
or damage or effect to the house or land.
279. Prohibition of building a house in other's land without consent:
(1) No person shall build a house in a land without obtaining
written consent of the owner of that land.
If any person builds a house in a land without
obtaining written consent of the owner of that land, the land-owner
may, if he or she so desires, purchase the house on payment of the
price that is less by up to twenty-five percent of the market price of
that house.
If the land-owner does not purchase such house
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner may, if the owner so
consents, purchase the land on payment of the price that is higher
by up to twenty-five percent of the market price of the land where
the house is located.
If both parties do not agree to purchase and sell the
house or land pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the person who has
built the house shall demolish the house and take away his or her
materials within a period of three months of the date on which the
house was so built.
If the house is not demolished within the period
referred to in sub-section (4), such a house shall belong to the
landowner.
280. To leave land while putting window: If a person or government
body has to build a house by putting a window or door towards the
neighbor's land, the person or body shall leave the land according to
the standards specified by the concerned body.
281. Prohibition of channeling water of house or roof: No person
shall channel the water of his or her house or roof to other's house
or land or a public road.
282. Prohibition of making safety tank adjoining to neighbor's land:
(1) No person shall construct a safety tank by adjoining it to the
neighbor's land.
If a person has to construct a safety tank in his or her
land, he or she shall leave at least the land according to the
standards specified by the concerned body, except in cases where
the neighbor's consent is available.
283. To leave land while digging well or Kuwa: In digging a well or a
small (Kuwa) in one's land, one shall leave the land so that the
distance of at least one meter can be maintained from the
neighbor’s land.
284. Prohibition of planting trees or plants causing effect: (1) No
person shall plant a tree or plants in such a way so that it causes
effects to other's house, land or property.
If any tree or plant planted by a person in one's land
cause any effect by expanding to other's house, land or property, the
person who has planted such tree or plants shall cut the branches or
roots of the tree or plant in such manner as not to cause loss or
damage to that person's house, land or property.
If a person who has planted such tree or plants fails to
cut off the branches or roots of the tree or plants pursuant to sub157
section (2), the person who is affected therefrom may cut off the
branches or roots of such tree or plants on his or her own.
285. Compensation to be recovered: If any damage is caused to any
person from any act done or action taken by any person under this
Chapter, the damage sustaining person shall be entitled to recover a
reasonable compensation from the person who has done such act.
286. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
six months after the date of knowledge of the commission of such
act or action.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Cultivation, Use and Registration of Land
287. Prohibition of use of other's land: No person shall cultivate or use,
or cause to be cultivated or used, any land in which another person
has right, possession and ownership, without consent of that person.
288. Requirement to allow land to be used for ditch: (1) If a person
who needs to construct a ditch through other's land to cultivate land
requests for land, the concerned owner of the land shall provide the
land for the construction of the ditch through the place where the
concerned landowner considers appropriate.
In consideration for the land provided for construction
of a ditch through it pursuant to sub-section (1), the person who
constructs the ditch shall provide a substitute land, amount
according to the prevailing price of the land used in the construction
of the ditch or reasonable compensation to the concerned landowner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if a ditch is constructed in a public or government land, it is not
required to provide a substitute land, price of land or compensation
for the land used in construction of the ditch.
289. Prohibition of using whole water of river or stream: No owner
of a land shall so use the whole water of the river or stream which
originates or flows from the land as to prevent the owner of
downstream land from using the same or as to endanger the life of
aquatic animals in the river or stream or as to adversely affect the
ecological balance.
290. Prohibition of making new ditch affecting irrigated field: No
person shall construct a new ditch above a land irrigated by a ditch
already made and in operation in a manner to significantly lessen
the volume of water in that land.
291. Use and allocation of ditch water: (1) A person who has spent
labor or money in the construction of a ditch shall have the first
priority to the ditch water for the cultivation of land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
in a place where people have been using the water according to
agreed division between them from the time immemorial, all people
shall be entitled to use the ditch water according to the division.
If the water is sufficient for or no longer required for a
person who uses the water pursuant to sub-section (1), another
person shall be entitled to use the ditch water for cultivating the
land irrespective of the person whom the ditch belongs to.
If the land of a person is irrigated and then water
overflows to other’s land, such water may be used even without the
consent of the concerned land-owner, and no claim shall entertained
for the same.
292. Prohibition of alteration in ditch without consent: If any ditch is
constructed only in the land of a person and other persons have also
been using the ditch, the owner of land where such ditch is situated
shall not be allowed to alter the ditch without consent of the other
persons using it.
293. One who does not make labor or expenses in making ditch not
allowed to use water: (1) While making a new ditch or repairing
an old ditch, all persons who use the water of such ditch shall make
necessary labor or expenses in proportion to their respective land.
A person who does not make labor or expenses in
making a new ditch or repairing an old one pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall not be entitled to use the water of such a ditch.
294. Construction of ditch or use of water with mutual consent:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
there is a separate agreement between the concerned land-owners or
those who make a ditch or who are users of water in relation to the
construction of ditch or using of water for the cultivation of land,
the ditch may be made or water used according to that agreement.
295. Cultivation of land adjacent to river bank: If a river or stream
enters in a land and divides it or cuts a land, the land shall belong to
its owner and may be cultivated by the owner after the river or
stream changes its course and leaves the land.
296. Prohibition of registration: No person shall register, or cause to
be registered, other’s land in his or her name.
297. Transmission and registration and deregistration to be effected:
(1) If a person needs to have transfer of a land on the death of its
registration holder or to have registration and deregistration of a
land in which the person has got right in any manner, the concerned
person shall submit an application to the Land Revenue Office and
obtain transmission and registration and deregistration of the matter
within thirty-five days of the occurrence of such an event.
If a person submits an application for transmission and
registration and deregistration of the matter after the expiry of the
time-limit referred to in sub-section (1), the Land Revenue Office
shall execute the transmission and registration of such land in the
applicant's name by collecting the fee of one hundred rupees
irrespective of the length of time after such expiration.
298. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within six months after the date of knowledge of commission of
such an act or action.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Government, Public and Community
Properties
299. Property deemed to be government property: The following
property title to which belongs to, or which is owned, controlled by,
or subject to, the Government of Nepal, Province Government and
Local Government shall be deemed to be the government property:
Government houses, buildings or lands,
Roads, paths or railways,
Forests, or trees or trees, bushes in forests,
Rivers, rivulets, streams, lakes, ponds and banks
thereof,
Canals, ditches or uncultivated, barren lands,
Mines or minerals,
Himalaya, mountains, rocks, sandy lands, public
gardens,
Any Property other than a public, community, trust
property or any one's property.
300. Property deemed to be public property: (1) The following
property which is for public purpose shall be deemed to be the
public property:
Houses, lands, sewerage or roads having been used
since ancient times,
Wells, water conduits, shores, ponds and banks thereof,
Exits for chattels, pasture lands, Kharka, graveyards,
Chihan, Samadhisthal, Kabristan and lands where
these are located,
Inns, Pauwas, Dewals, religious meditation sites,
memorials, temples, shrines, Chaitya, monasteries,
Stupas, churches, Chowk, Dawali, Chautari or lands
where these are located,
Lands where fairs, markets and public entertainment or
sports sites are located,
Private property provided by any person for public
purposes,
Such other property as prescribed to be the public
property by the Government of Nepal, by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
The ownership of the public property shall vest in the
public body or the Government of Nepal.
301. Property deemed to be community property: Any land held by a
community for its use, any structure built in such land or other
property owned by it shall be deemed to be the community property.
302. Details to be updated: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall prepare
and update the following details in relation to the government and
public properties situated within the district:
The location where the government or public
properties are situated, plot number and area, in the
case of a land, and situation of the house, if any,
If the government or public properties are possessed by,
or subjected to, any body or organization, details
thereof,
Other necessary details.
The Local Level shall render necessary assistance to
the Land Revenue Office in preparing the details referred to in subsection (1).
After the preparation of the details pursuant to subsection (1), the Land Revenue Office shall forward a copy thereof
to the concerned district level administrative office and Local Level.
The Local Level shall collect and update the details
referred to in sub-section (1) in relation to the community
properties situated within its jurisdiction and forward a copy thereof
to the concerned Land Revenue Office.
303. Land ownership registration certificate to be provided: (1) If
any government land is held in the name of a government body or
public organization, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such
body or organization and provide it to such body or organization.
If any land is available to a community in accordance
with law, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land ownership
registration certificate of such land in the name of such community
and provide it to that community.
304. Obligation to protect government, public or community
properties: (1) The Government of Nepal, public organization or
community holding the right in, possession, custody of, and control
over, the government, public or community properties shall itself
protect such properties.
To protect government and public properties shall be
responsibility of the concerned district level administrative office
and Local Level.
The concerned community and Local Level shall be
responsible for the protection of the community property.
305. Prohibition of registration of government, public or community
properties in individual's name: (1) No person shall register, or
cause to be registered, any government, public or community
property in his or her name.
If a person registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in the name of any
individual, such registration shall, ipso facto, be void.
If a complaint is filed as to the registration of any
government, public or community property in any individual's name,
the concerned Land Revenue Office shall summon the presence of
the registration-holder also and inquire into the matter, as required,
and make necessary decision within six months after the date of
filing the complaint.
If the registration of any government, public or
community property in any individual's name is annulled pursuant
to this Section, the Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary
entries in the records maintained in his or her office and give
information thereof to the concerned district level administrative
office and Local Level.
The Land Revenue Office shall punish a person who
registers, or causes to be registered, any government, public or
community property in contravention of this Section with a fine of
twenty-five thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.
The registration of government, public or community
property in oneself or some individual's name which in itself is
offence as per prevailing laws, nothing written in this section shall
be an obstacle to take action in offence related to it.
306. Prohibition of possession or cultivation of government, public
or community land: (1) No person shall possess any government,
public or community land by way of overlapping, encroachment,
surrounding or otherwise.
No person shall, except with the permission of the
Government of Nepal, concerned public organization or community,
cultivate, or cause to be cultivated, any government, public or
community land.
If any person possesses or cultivates any government,
public or community land in contravention of sub-section (1) or (2),
the concerned Land Revenue Office, in the case of the government
or public land, and the concerned Local Level, in the case of the
community land, shall separate such land, recover the crops yielded
in the land from that person and vacate the land.
The Land Revenue Office may punish any person who
possesses or cultivates any government, public or community land
in contravention of this Section with a fine not exceeding ten
thousand rupees.
307. Prohibition of building structure: (1) No person shall build any
structure in any government, public or community land, for any
personal or public purpose.
Provided that any structure may be constructed as considered
appropriate by the Government of Nepal, in the case of a
government or public land, and by the concerned community for
public purpose, in the case of a community land.
If any person initiate to construct any structure in any
government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Level
shall stop such work immediately.
If any person has already constructed any structure in
any government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer shall give a timelimit of fifteen days to the main person having constructed the
structure to demolish such structure.
The main person having constructed such a structure
shall demolish the structure at his or her own expense within the
time-limit given pursuant to sub-section (3).
If the main person having constructed such a structure
fails to demolish the structure within the time-limit given pursuant
to sub-section (3), the concerned Chief District Officer shall
demolish such a structure.
If the Chief District Officer demolishes any structure
pursuant to sub-section (5), the Chief District Officer may recover
the expenses incurred in such demolition from the main person
having constructed the structure and punish him or her with a fine
not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.
It shall be the duty of the concerned police office to
render necessary assistance, if any, sought by the Local Level in
stopping the construction of any structure or in demolishing any
already built structure pursuant to this Section.
308. Power to transfer government property: The Government of
Nepal may transfer any government property owned and possessed
by, or subjected to, any body or organization to any other body or
organization, with the permission of such an owner body or
organization.
309. Conversion of community property into public property: (1) If
any community holding a community property does not use it or
submits an application bearing signature or thumb impression of
each of the main persons of all families of such a community,
setting out that it is not necessary to use such community property
in its purpose, to the concerned Land Revenue Office, the
concerned Land Revenue Officer may make necessary inquiry into
the matter and convert such property into the public property.
In the event of conversion of any community property
into the public property pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary entries in the records
maintained in his or her office and give information thereof to the
concerned district level administrative office and Local Level.
310. To reward complainant: (1) Any person whosoever may make a
complaint with the concerned body on the matters of registration, or
causing registration, of a government, public or community
property, or possession, use or cultivation of a land under such
property or construction work done in such land, in contravention
of this Chapter.
If, on inquiring into a complaint made pursuant to subsection (1), the complaint is held to be true, the concerned body
shall provide the complainant with a reward in a sum that is half the
fine imposed on the wrongdoer pursuant to this Chapter.
The concerned body may keep confidential a complaint
made pursuant to sub-section (1).
311. Action to be taken: (1) If any employee, either knowingly or
negligently or recklessly registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in the name of any
person or if any employee with the duty to render assistance
pursuant to this Chapter does not render such assistance, such
employee shall be liable to departmental action in accordance with
the law of terms and conditions of his or her service.
Nothing shall prevent the taking of action against an
employee who commits an act referred to in sub-section (1) on a
criminal offence, in addition to the action taken under sub-section
312. Governmental attorney empowered to file or make case,
petition or appeal: (1) The concerned government attorney shall
have power to file or make a case, petition or appeal against any
decision made by any body or authority, adversely affecting any
government or public property.
The concerned office or authority shall provide the
government attorney with such documents and other assistance as
may be necessary in relation to the filing or making of a case,
petition or appeal pursuant to sub-section (1).
313. Statute of limitation: A person may make a lawsuit at any time in
the cases of Sections 305, 306 and 307 of this Chapter, and a person
who is aggrieved from any act done or action taken referred to in
other Sections of this Chapter may make a lawsuit within six
months after the date on which such an act was done or action was
taken.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Trusts
314. Trust deemed to be established: If a person makes necessary
arrangements for the operation and management by another of a
property in which the person has right, ownership and possession
for the benefit of beneficiary, a trust shall be deemed to be
established.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"beneficiary" means a person, group, general public, body whether
incorporated or unincorporated, or community getting the benefit
from the trust property.
315. Trust may be public or private: (1) A trust may be either public
or private.
A trust established for the accomplishment of the
following object shall be deemed to be a public trust:
To establish, operate and use a fund for
infrastructures of economic development or other
development works,
To establish and operate a fund necessary for the
development of skills, creation of employment
opportunities and development of the people with
low income,
To operate social welfare programs,
To establish and operate such educational and
academic institutes like schools, colleges and
universities as may be useful for the general
public,
To establish and operate clinics such as hospitals
and health posts for public purposes,
To protect natural, historical or cultural heritages
or to promote such act,
To operate programs for the protection of wildlife,
aquatic animals or environment,
To operate programs for the protection of interest,
welfare or upliftment of various classes, groups or
communities,
To operate programs relating to sports,
To carry out service-oriented welfare programs,
To operate rescue works,
To establish shrines, temples, monasteries, domes,
mosques, churches or carry out similar other
religious activities,
To operate other public programs for the interest
of public.
A trust which is established with object to render
benefit, advantage or facility to any particular person or group shall
be deemed to be a private trust.
If a trust is established to accomplish both public and
private objectives, such a trust shall be deemed to be a public trust.
316. Application to be made for establishment of trust: (1) A person
who intends to establish a trust shall make an application, setting
out the following matters, to the Registrar:
Value and details of the property held for the trust,
Beneficiary, and benefit and facility to the beneficiary,
the terms and limitation thereof,
If the trust is to be established for any particular period,
matter relating thereto,
Other necessary details.
In making an application pursuant to sub-section (1),
the following documents shall also be submitted with the
application:
Memorandum of incorporation of the trust,
Trustee's name and photocopy of the deed relating to
his or her consent,
Photocopy of the deed, if any, executed for the
establishment of the trust,
Photocopy of a reliable deed relating to the trust
settler's identity, and, in the case of the trust settler
being a body corporate, certified copies of the
documents relating to the incorporation of the body
corporate and of the decision by such a body corporate
in relation to the establishment of trust,
Receipt of payment of the fees chargeable by law for
the registration of trust.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter:
"Registrar" means the authority provided for by
law for the registration, supervision and
liquidation of trusts, and this term also includes
the Land Revenue Officer in the concerned
district if such authority is not so provided for.
"Trustee" means the person who is responsible
for the operation and management of a trust
property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any person has, by way of his or her oral behavior, conduct or a
testamentary gift or will, provided for the operation and
management of a property in which he or she has right, ownership
and possession as a trust, the trust shall be deemed to have been
established by such behavior, conduct or will.
Provided that in the case of a property requiring registration
for the transfer of its title in accordance with law, a deed pertaining
to such transfer has to be registered.
If a foreign person intends to establish a trust, the
person shall make an application, upon fulfilling the procedures as
referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2). A foreign person may be the
founder of the trust to be so established.
Provided that a foreign person is not allowed to establish a
trust for the accomplishment of the object referred to in clause (l) of
sub-section (2) of Section 315.
At least one-thirds of the trustees of a trust established
pursuant to sub-section (4) shall be Nepali citizens having
permanent residence in Nepal.
317. Details to be set out in memorandum of incorporation: The
following matters shall be set out in the memorandum of
incorporation of a trust:
Names, surnames and addresses of the founders of the
trust, and, if a body corporate is the founder, names,
surnames and addresses of the directors of such body,
Objects and nature of the trust,
Names, surnames and addresses of the trustees, details
of the business to be performed by them, and, if a body
corporate is a trustee, name, surname and address of
the person designated by the body to act as the trustee,
Details of the beneficiaries,
Method of use of the trust property,
Details of the tenure of the trustee, if any, so specified,
If the beneficiaries are entitled to remuneration or other
facilities, details thereof and limitation,
If the trust is intended to be established for a certain
period, details of such period,
In the event of termination of the trust, consequences
thereof,
Provisions relating to the operation, management and
monitoring of the trust property,
Other necessary matters.
318. Trust to be registered: (1) If an application is made for the
establishment of a trust pursuant to Section 316, the Registrar shall
make necessary inquiry into the objects of the trust and the details
of the property proposed for the establishment of the trust, and, if it
appears reasonable to register the trust, register the trust and issue
the trust registration certificate, within a period of thirty-five days
of the making of such application.
If a trust is registered pursuant to sub-section (1), the
trust is deemed to have been established.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a private trust may be operated even without registration.
Provided that if a person so operates a private trust, the
person shall give information thereof to the concerned Registrar.
319. Power to refuse registration of trust: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 318, the Registrar may refuse to
register a trust in any of the following circumstances:
If the details, documents or fees referred to in Section
316 are not mentioned or paid,
If the name of the trust resembles with the name of any
other trust already registered prior to the registration of
the trust applied for,
If the objects or terms of the trust appear to be
inappropriate or undesirable for reasons of public
interest, decency, courtesy or public order, are not
lawful or are not capable of being implemented owing
to their uncertainty or vagueness.
If a trust is not capable of being registered pursuant to
sub-section (1), the Registrar shall give information thereof, along
with the reason for refusal, to the applicant within thirty-five days.
If, upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section
(2), the applicant makes necessary corrections and an application
again for the registration of the trust, the Registrar shall register the
trust and issue the registration certificate pursuant to sub-section (1)
of Section 318, within fifteen days of the making of such an
application.
320. Transfer of property for incorporation of trust: (1) The trust
founder shall transfer the property settled for the trust to the trustee
within a period of three months of the establishment of the trust.
If the property to be transferred pursuant to sub-section
(1) is an immovable property, such a property shall be deemed to
have been duly transferred only when it is transferred in accordance
with law.
A foreign person that establishes a trust in Nepal shall
remit into Nepal a movable property equivalent to at least one
million United States Dollars through regular banking channel and
hand over the same to the trustee within a period of three months.
The information of the hand-over of the movable
property pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be given to the Registrar.
321. Dissolution of trust on failure of transfer of property: In the
event of failure to transfer the property within the time-limit
referred to in Section 320, the registration of such a trust shall be
deemed to be void ipso facto and the trust shall be deemed to have
been dissolved.
322. Operation and management of trust property according to
memorandum of incorporation: (1) The trustee shall, subject to
the terms and restrictions set forth in the memorandum of
incorporation, operate and manage the trust property.
Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, the trustee shall, in operating and managing the
property pursuant to sub-section (1), not sell, mortgage, or
otherwise transfer title to, the immovable property or any part
thereof without prior permission of the concerned Registrar.
In asking for prior permission of the Registrar pursuant
to sub-section (2), the reason for the sale, mortgage of, or transfer
of title to, such property, and the reasons and grounds that it may
result in more benefit to the beneficiary shall be set out.
323. Duty to operate and manage trust property properly: (1) The
trustee shall operate and manage the trust property properly, by
exercising his or her capacity and diligence honestly.
In the operation and management of the trust property
pursuant to sub-section (1), the trustee shall make arrangement to
avoid any loss and damage to, and maintain sustainability of, such
property.
Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, in the operation and management of the trust
property pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), income earned from
the trust property which is not required immediately to accomplish
the objects of trust may be invested for the accomplishment of the
objects of trust.
Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, in making investment pursuant to sub-section (3),
it may be invested as follows, in the following proportion of the
total sum:
At lest twenty-five percent in the purchase of bonds or
treasury bills issued by the Government of Nepal or
Nepal Rastra Bank or bonds guaranteed by the
Government of Nepal,
Deposit of a maximum of twenty-five percent in a
fixed account with a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed
account with a development bank,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of
ordinary shares of a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed
account with a finance company,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of such
ordinary shares of an enlisted public limited company
as are dealt publicly.
The trustee shall, from time to time, carry out
monitoring as to the investment made pursuant to sub-section (4),
and if it appears from such monitoring that the returns of
investment made in one sector be lesser, such investment shall be
withdrawn immediately and made in another sector yielding more
returns, subject to the terms and restrictions of the investment.
In making monitoring or investment pursuant to subsection (5), opinion of an expert in the concerned sector may, as
required, be obtained.
An opinion obtained pursuant to sub-section (6) may
be taken as the basis for monitoring or investment.
The trustee shall maintain his or her personal property
and the trust property separately and operate and mange the trust
property accordingly, and in the event of a need to operate an
account, separate accounts shall be maintained.
324. Trustee to be appointed: (1) A trustee shall be appointed for the
operation, management, protection and care of (herbichar)the trust
property and for using fruits of such property to the benefit of the
beneficiary or making proper arrangements thereof.
Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, the founder of the trust shall appoint the trustee.
In the event of the failure to appoint or inability to
appoint the trustee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the founder of
trust shall be deemed to be the trustee.
325. Disqualification of trustee: The following person shall not be
qualified to be a trustee:
A person who is not competent to make contract,
A person who has embezzled a property in his or
her custody,
A person who has been convicted by a court of the
offense of corruption,
A person who has been sentenced for a criminal
offense involving moral turpitude,
A person who is the sole beneficiary of the trust
property.
326. Number of Trustees: Except as otherwise provided for in the
memorandum of incorporation, the number of trustees shall, subject
to the other provisions of this Chapter, be one in minimum and
seven in maximum.
327. Body corporate being eligible to be trustee: (1) A body corporate
which is established in accordance with law may be appointed as a
trustee.
If the body corporate referred to in sub-section (1) is
appointed as a trustee, the person working as the chief of such a
body or a person to whom the power is delegated by a decision of
the board of directors of such a body shall act on behalf of such a
body.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"person working as the chief" means the chairperson, director,
managing director, general manager, executive director of such
body or a person empowered by such a body to work as its chief.
328. Provisions relating to vacancy in office of trustee: (1) The office
of the trustee shall be fallen vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
If the person is not qualified to be a trustee,
If the person resigns from the office of a trustee,
If the person dies or becomes insolvent,
If, in the case of a body corporate, it is dissolved,
liquidated or becomes insolvent in accordance
with law,
If a trust is established for a certain period and
such a period is completed,
If the trustee is appointed for a certain tenure and
such a tenure is completed,
If the trustee is removed by the trust founder or
court on the ground that he or she has embezzled
the trust property or has not taken a reasonable
care of (herchaha) such property.
If the office of a trustee is fallen vacant pursuant to
sub-section (1), such an office shall be filled in accordance with the
procedures set forth in the memorandum of incorporation.
If the office of trustee cannot be fulfilled pursuant to
sub-section (2), the beneficiary, if available, and the concerned
Local Level, if there is no beneficiary or the beneficiary cannot be
identified, shall make an application, accompanied by a list of
possible candidates, to the concerned District Court for the
appointment of a trustee.
If an application is made for the appointment of trustee
pursuant to sub-section (3), the District Court shall appoint to the
office of trustee an appropriate person from the list of candidates
provided by the applicant, in consonance with the spirit of the
memorandum of incorporation.
If any trustee is relieved of his or her office by virtue
of the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall, as
promptly as possible, hand over the trust property in his or her
custody, control or use to other trustees, and he or she shall not get
immunity from any kind of liability or legal action for any act done
or action taken by him or her while in office of a trustee by the
reason only that he or she has been so relieved of office.
Provided that if all trustees are relieved of office, such
property shall be transferred after the appointment of another
trustee.
If the office of a trustee of a public trust with only one
trustee falls vacant or is fulfilled pursuant to this Section,
information thereof shall be given to the registrar.
329. To specify roll of succession of trustee: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in as to the roll of succession of trustees in the
memorandum of incorporation, after the death of a trustee, his or
her eldest son, daughter-in-law or daughter shall succeed the office
of a trustee according to the roll of succession, and if there is no
one out of them, his or her heir shall succeed the office of trustee.
If a person who becomes the trustee pursuant to subsection (1) is not qualified to be the trustee, his or her guardian or
the person taking care of (herchaha) him or her shall perform the
obligation of the trustee on his or her behalf until such a person
becomes qualified.
Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum
of incorporation, if there is a provision that one's descendents are
entitled to be the trustee, the descendents of such a person shall
succeed the office of trustee according to the limit of their
respective rights, and the provisions contained in Section 326 shall
not apply to such case.
330. Requirement to perform obligation of trustee in special
circumstance: If there exists a situation that the office of trustee
falls vacant in entirety and the office of trustee cannot be filled
immediately pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 328, the Local
Level shall function as the trustee until the office is filled.
331. Requirement to operate trust by consensus: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, the
trust with more than one trustee shall be operated by consensus
decision of all the trustees as far as possible.
In the event of failure to reach consensus pursuant to
sub-section (1), the trust may be operated by a majority decision of
the then existing trustees, and if that is not possible, by the decision
of the eldest trustee.
332. To carry out object of trust: The trustee shall carry out the object
of trust as set forth in the memorandum of incorporation, and in so
carrying out the object, the trustee shall discharge functions
honestly and according to his or her capacity and diligence.
333. To maintain records of trust property: (1) The trustee shall
prepare an inventory of the trust property and update the records
thereof, and, in the case of a public trust, a copy of such records
shall be submitted to the registrar each year.
The inventory referred to in sub-section (1) shall also
reflect the total assets, loans, or if such property has been invested
in any business, principal, interest or other returns of such
investment.
334. Protection of trust property: (1) The trustee shall protect and
maintain the trust property, and may also make any kind of such
legal action or complete any kind of such formality with any public
authority as may be required for this purpose.
In protecting or maintaining the trust property, the
trustee shall take proper and reasonable care of (herbichar), and do
act conducive to the enhancement of, the trustee property as if the
property were his or her own.
335. Prohibition of possession of trust property to prejudice benefit
of beneficiary: No trustee shall so possess or use the trust property
for himself or herself or other person as may be prejudicial to the
benefit of the beneficiary.
336. Duty to prevent loss to trust property: (1) It shall be the duty of
the trustee to prevent destruction, termination of, or otherwise loss
to, the trust in a manner prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary
or contrary to the object of the trust.
If the trust property is not managed properly or is made
subject to cheating or fraud or is embezzled or used for other
purposes, any trustee or beneficiary may, subject to the provisions
set forth in the memorandum of incorporation, file a complaint in
the court for the prevention of such embezzlement.
Provided that any one whosoever may file a complaint in the
case of a public trust.
If, upon a complaint filed pursuant to sub-section (2), it
is held that the trust property has not been managed properly or has
been made subject to cheating or fraud or embezzled or used for
other purposes, the court shall recover the claimed amount from the
embezzler and may also order compensation to be paid by a trustee
if the trustee has committed such embezzlement.
337. To maintain accounts of trust: (1) The trustee shall maintain
accounts in a manner to reflect clearly and actually the accounts of
the trust property, and provide statements thereof available to the
registrar, and trust founder or beneficiary, identified, if any, intends
to inspect the same.
In the case of a public trust, the trustee shall have its
accounts audited by a recognized auditor each year and submit a
copy of the audit report to the registrar.
338. Breach of trust: (1) If a trustee fails to fulfill the duties required to
be fulfilled pursuant to this Chapter, the trustee shall be deemed to
have committed a breach of trust.
In the event of a breach of trust pursuant to sub-section
(1), the trustee so breaching trust shall be responsible for the loss
and damage caused to the beneficiary and bear liability for the same.
In bearing the liability pursuant to sub-section (2), the
trustee breaching trust shall bear such profits as may be equal to the
income or profits which the trust or beneficiary would have made or
earned if the trust had not been breached.
If a trust has more than one trustee, all trustees who
commit a breach of trust shall collectively bear the liability for the
loss and damage caused from such breach of trust.
If, in relation to one portion of any trust, the trust is
breached, and, in relation to another portion of the trust, benefit is
derived, the trustee shall not use such benefit in the fulfillment of
his or her liability.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the trustee shall not bear the liability for the loss and
damage caused from the breach of trust, in the following
circumstance:
If the loss and damage is caused by operation of law,
If the loss and damage is a result of the breach of trust
by any act done by the previous trustee or the
consequence thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, any one who does any of the following acts in relation to a
trust in operation upon being incorporated in accordance with law
in force for the time being prior to the commencement of this Act
shall be deemed to have committed a breach of trust:
Failing to do acts set forth in the Donative inscription,
Shilapatra of the trust or deed establishing such trust,
Selling, disposing of, gifting, donating or pledging or
mortgaging the trust property by the trust founder or
his or her offspring or heir, except for the residual
property that can be possessed and used after making
operation as set forth in the deeds including the
Donative inscription, Shilapatra of the trust,
Embezzling the movable trust property by the trustee,
except for reasonable wear and tear while using it for
the trust purpose.
One who commits a breach of trust under sub-section
(7) shall be liable to action in accordance with the law in force at
the time of the commencement of this Act.
339. Deed of trust property to remain with trustee: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, the
deeds, documents of the ownership and possession of the trust
property and other proofs and evidences pertaining thereto shall all
be in the custody of the trustee, and in the case of a public trust, the
trustee shall submit copies of such deeds and documents to the
registrar.
Provided that in the case of any deed, document or evidence
to be approved by the registrar, it is not required to submit the
copies of such deeds, documents or evidence to the registrar.
The trustee and the registrar shall safely retain the
deeds, documents and evidences referred to in sub-section (1).
340. Entitlement
reimbursement
trust
property:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
the trustee has used his or her personal property or other's property
in the course of the protection of the trust property, accomplishment
of the object of trust or protection of the benefit of the beneficiary,
the trustee shall be entitled to reimburse the amount for such
property from the trust property.
341. Other powers, duties and liabilities deemed to be vested with
trustee: Except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum of
incorporation, in addition to the powers, duties and liabilities
clearly set forth in this Chapter, such other powers and duties as
may be required for the implementation and accomplishment of the
object of trust, care (herbichar)and protection of the trust property
and protection of the rights and benefits of the beneficiary shall be
deemed to be vested with the trustee.
342. Acts not to be done by trustee: (1) Except as otherwise provided
for in the memorandum of incorporation, no trustee shall do, or
cause to be done, any of the following acts:
To use the trust property in any manner other than in
the accomplishment of the object of trust,
To use, or caused to be used, the trust property in any
act yielding profit to the trustee himself or herself or to
anyone else, except in the accomplishment of the
object of trust,
To delegate or hand over the responsibility or
obligation of trustee to another trustee or a person,
Provided that nothing shall bar the appointing of
his or her agent or attorney in the course of ordinary
transaction or assigning of any responsibility or
obligation if such responsibility or obligation is to be
assigned in view of the nature of such transaction or
assigning of any responsibility to another person with
the consent of the beneficiary, if any, identified.
To carry out any act relating to the trust solely contrary
to Section 329, if there are more than one trustee,
To obtain any remuneration, allowance or facility in
consideration for being a trustee,
Provided that nothing shall bar the receiving of
reasonable remuneration, allowance or facility for any
work done whole-time or part-time after establishing
the office or with the prior permission of the registrar,
without prejudicing the object of the trust or benefit of
the beneficiary.
To purchase or otherwise receive on pledge, mortgage,
lease or rent the property of the trust for which he or
she is a trustee during his or her tenure or before at
least three years of his or her retirement from the
office of a trustee.
The trustee shall not make any economic transaction
between his or her private property and the trust property. He or she
shall make compensation for the loss, if any, to the trust property
from such transaction.
The trustee shall not merge his or her property with the
trust property.
343. To give direction to transfer trust property: Except as otherwise
provided for in the memorandum of incorporation, in the case of
only one beneficiary, after he or she becomes competent to make
contract, and in the case of more than one beneficiary, after all of
them become competent to make contract and reach consensus,
such beneficiary or beneficiaries may direct the trustee to hand over
the trust property to him or her or them, and if any direction is so
given, it shall be the duty of the trustee to abide by such direction.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to the public trust.
344. Power to relinquish benefit of trust property: (1) In the case of a
private trust, the beneficiary who is competent to make contract
may, by a notice in writing to the trustee and the registrar,
relinquish any or all of his or her right, benefit, facility or interest
from the trust property.
If every beneficiary wholly relinquishes the right,
benefit, facility or interest from the trust property pursuant to subsection (1), such a trust shall be deemed to have been dissolved.
345. Duty to maintain ownership of trust property: (1) The trust
property shall be entered as such in the records of trust and held in
the name of the person specified in the memorandum of
incorporation and in the name of the beneficiary, if such a person is
not specified in the memorandum of incorporation.
If, in the case of a public trust, the memorandum of
incorporation provides for the establishment of a separate body
corporate for the operation and management of the trust property,
such property shall be held in the name of the body corporate so
established.
346. Alteration in the object of trust: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the trust founder considers
appropriate to make any amendment or alteration in the object set
forth in the memorandum of incorporation at the time of the
creation of trust, he or she may make an application, accompanied
by the reason for such amendment or alteration, to the registrar.
If, on an inquiry into an application made pursuant to
sub-section (1), the reason for the amendment or alteration in the
object set forth in the memorandum of incorporation seems to be
reasonable, the registrar may issue an order to amend or alter such
object, and, if an order is so made, the object set forth in the
memorandum of incorporation shall be deemed to have been
amended or altered accordingly.
347. Trust property not to be counted: Any trust property operated
and managed by the trustee shall not be counted as the property of
the trustee for the purpose of assessment of tax or for any other
purpose.
Provided that in the case of a person who derives any benefit,
facility or interest from such property, such benefit, facility or
interest shall be counted.
348. Consequence of voidance of trust: (1) If a trust once established is
dissolved or voided for any reason, such dissolution or voidance
shall not affect any act already done.
In the event of dissolution or voidance of a trust for
any reason pursuant to sub-section (1), in the case of a public trust,
except as otherwise provided for in the memorandum of its
incorporation, the trustee may, by order of the registrar, hand over
the trust property to any other trust with the identical object or to
any public body with similar objects if such other trust is not
available, and in the case of a private trust, the trustee shall hand
over the trust property to the beneficiary, if identified, or to the
nearest successor to the beneficiary if the beneficiary is not
available or to the trust founder if even such successor is not
available or to other successor if even the trust founder is not
available.
If any body or person referred to in sub-section (2) is
not available, the property of the dissolved or voided trust shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal.
349. Appeal may be made: A party who is not satisfied with any order
or decision made by the registrar pursuant to this Chapter may
make an appeal to the concerned District Court within thirty-five
days after the date of knowledge of such order or decision.
350. Not to affect other trust: (1) Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall affect any trust in operation upon being incorporated in
accordance with law in force for the time being prior to the
commencement of this Act, and such a trust may be operated in
accordance with the Donative inscription (Danpatra), Shilapatra,
memorandum of incorporation or other deed establishing such a
trust or with the ritual, custom or practice.
Provided that such a trust shall be registered under this Act or
information of its operation shall be given to the registrar within
three years of the commencement of this Act, and records thereof
shall be maintained.
The trust referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
managed and operated as previously for the object and purpose for
which it was established, and the property or income that remains
upon the accomplishment of that object and purpose may be
possessed, used, pledged or mortgaged.
The property of a trust established pursuant to subsection (1) may be purchased or sold in a manner without prejudice
the object and purpose of the trust.
The purchaser under sub-section (3) shall use the
property for the object and purpose for which the trust was
established.
If a trust under sub-section (1) has been established or
operated for any specific purpose by obtaining a government land,
such a land shall be used for the accomplishment of the object and
purpose for which the trust was established, and such a land shall
not be used by the trustor or his or her offspring or successor.
If the person referred to in sub-section (5) does not
accomplish the object and purpose of such a trust, the person who
accomplishes such object and purpose shall be entitled to possess
and use such a land.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any person has continuously operated a trust referred to
in sub-section (1) since last sixteen years or more than sixteen years
ago without any deed to that effect, that person may possess and use
such property upon the accomplishment of the object and purpose
of such a trust.
Matters other than those set forth in this Section shall
be as set forth in the memorandum of incorporation of a trust,
Sheelapatra, Donative Inscription or as per the custom and practice
in relation to the operation of such a trust.
351. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation in
relation to the following matters if a person who is aggrieved from
any act done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter is to make a
lawsuit:
Embezzlement of the trust property,
Fraud or forgery of any document relating to the trust
property,
Embezzlement or misappropriation of the trust
property,
Derivation of benefit by the trustee contrary to the
terms of the memorandum of incorporation of the trust,
Restitution of the trust property or its value or income
from the trustee or other person.
A lawsuit may be made within six months after the
date of the accrual of cause of action in relation to any matter other
than that set forth in sub-section (1).

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Usufruct
352. Usufruct deemed to be constituted: (1) When a person gives free
a property in which he or she has title and ownership and fruits,
benefit, income or facility to be yielded from that property to
another person entitling that other person to enjoy such property
and fruits, benefit, income or facility thereof, usufruct shall be
deemed to be constituted.
The provisions of usufruct shall be as set forth in a
contract entered into between the concerned persons.
353. Usufruct to be effective: The provision of usufruct constituted by a
contract shall become effective on the date of the commencement of
the contract unless otherwise set forth in the contract.
354. Deed to be executed: (1) In giving an immovable property in
usufruct, its owner shall execute a deed to that effect in accordance
with law.
In giving a property in common in usufruct, consent of
the coparceners living in a joint family shall be obtained.
355. Entitlement of usufructuary to enjoy property as if it belonged
to him or her: (1) If a person gives another person his or her
property in usufruct, the usufructuary of such property shall be
entitled to enjoy the property, fruits, benefit, income or facility to
be yielded or earned from the property and fruits, benefit, income or
facility accrued from the property as if it were his or her own
property.
If there are more than one usufructuary obtaining a
property pursuant to sub-section (1), every usufructuary shall be
entitled to enjoy that property jointly or severally.
If a property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
partitioned, every coparcener who is entitled to enjoy the property
in usufruct shall be entitled to enjoy the property pursuant to subsection (1).
A usufructuary may make a lawsuit in the court, as
required, for the protection or enjoyment of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct.
356. Property which usufructuary cannot enjoy: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 355, a usufructuary shall not be
entitled to enjoy the following properties relating to the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct:
Mines and minerals related with the property,
Provided that where the mines are the subject of
usufruct, the mines may be enjoyed.
Grown trees.
Provided that fruits, flowers or other products
obtained from the trees may be enjoyed.
357. Prohibition of alteration in structure of property without
consent: A usufructuary shall not be entitled to significantly alter
the substance or form of the property obtained under the provision
of usufruct or to destroy such property, except with the owner's
prior permission.
Provided that if the enjoyment of the property given under
the provision of usufruct is not possible without an alteration in the
form of or destruction of the property, except as otherwise provided
for in the contract, the property may be enjoyed by altering its form
or destroying it, on payment of the price that may be set at the time
of returning such property.
358. Power to rent, lease or mortgage property under provision of
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary may, if he or she so desires, rent,
lease or mortgage the property obtained under the provision of
usufruct, by executing a deed, subject to the contract referred to in
sub-section (2) of Section 352.
Provided that:
It is not required to execute a deed for renting a
property for a monthly rent not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees.
If a property is so rented, leased or mortgaged, the
usufructuary shall give information thereof to the
owner.
The property obtained under the provision of usufruct
may not be rented, leased or mortgaged for a period
that exceeds the validity period of usufruct.
The usufructury shall, in renting, leasing or mortgaging
the property obtained under the provision of usufruct, mention in
the relevant deed that the property is under the provision of usufruct.
If a rent, lease or mortgage of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct is executed in contravention of subsections (1) and (2), such a transaction shall ipso facto be void.
A person who obtains a property on rent, lease or
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be entitled to enjoy the
property as if the person were the usufructuary.
359. Duty to maintain (marmat samhar) and care (herbichar)
property under the provision of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary
shall maintain (marmat samhar) and take care of (herbichar) the
property which he or she has obtained under the provision of
usufruct properly and reasonably as if it were his or her own
property.
If a person obtains a property under the provision of
usufruct by way of rent, lease or mortgage, the person shall take
care of such property properly and reasonably.
The usufructuary shall maintain the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct at his or her cost.
Provided that if it is necessary to maintain such property by
spending a substantial amount in consequence of a disaster, the
usufructuary shall obtain the owner's prior permission, and the
owner shall bear such maintenance expenses.
360. Prohibition of causing damage to property obtained under the
provision of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary shall not damage, or
cause to be damaged, the property obtained under the provision of
usufruct.
If such a property is damaged in any manner in the
course of its enjoyment by the usufructuary or by the person who
has obtained it on rent, lease or mortgage pursuant to Section 358,
the usufructuary shall be liable for it.
Provided that the usufructuary shall not be liable for any
damage or loss caused to such property by a disaster.
The usufructuary may make insurance or take other
necessary preventive measures for the protection of the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct against possible loss or
damage in the course of its enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2).
361. Usufructuary to bear tax or fee: The usufructuary shall pay such
tax or fee as may be leviable by law in relation to the property
obtained under the provision of the usufruct.
Provided that the owner shall bear the wealth tax payable for
the property obtained under the provision of the usufruct.
362. Information of claim or interference by any one to be given to
owner: (1) If any one makes encroachment, claim or interference
on or with the property under the provision of usufruct, the
usufructuary shall give information thereof to the owner within
fifteen days of such encroachment, claim or interference.
The usufructuary who does not give information
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be liable to any consequence
resulting therefrom.
363. Validity period of the provision of usufruct: (1) The provision of
usufruct shall remain valid for the period set forth in the contract.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the provision of usufruct shall not remain valid beyond the
following period, except as otherwise provided for in the contract:
If the usufructuary is a natural person, the death of the
usufructuary or the expiration of a period of forty-nine
years since the execution of the provision of usufruct,
whichever occurs earlier,
If the usufructuary is a legal person, the dissolution of
the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of
twenty-nine years since the execution of the provision
of usufruct, whichever occurs earlier.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,
the term "dissolution" includes the termination,
liquidation, revocation of registration or insolvency of
a legal person.
If there are more than one usufructuary, the property in
usufruct shall devolve on the owner in proportion to the death or
dissolution of any usufructuary, except as otherwise provided in the
contract.
364. Usufruct may be canceled:(1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in Section 363, if the usufructuary damages or misuses the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct or does not enjoy it for the
purpose for which it has been given in usufruct or otherwise does
any act that prejudices the right of the owner in such property, the
concerned owner may cancel the provision of usufruct at any time.
In the event of cancellation of the provision of usufruct
pursuant to sub-section (1), the usufructuary shall return the
property obtained under the provision of usufruct.
365. Power to return property by usufructuary: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Sections 363 and 364, if the usufructuary
does not wish to enjoy the property obtained under the provision of
usufruct, the usufructuary may return such a property to the owner
at any time, by giving a notice of at least forty-five days.
366. Usufruct deemed to be extinguished: (1) The provision of
usufruct shall be deemed to be extinguished in any of the following
circumstances:
In the event of expiration of the validity period of
usufruct pursuant to Section 363,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the
term "expiration of the validity period" means:
If more than one natural person are usufructuary,
the usufruct shall be deemed to be terminated on
the date on which the last survivor usufructuary
dies.
If more than one legal person are usufructuary,
the usufruct shall be deemed to be terminated on
the date on which the last usufructuary legal
person is dissolved.
In the event of return of the property on the
cancellation of usufruct pursuant to Section 364,
In the event of return of the property in usufruct by the
usufructuary pursuant to Section 365,
In the event, except for a reasonable reason, of the
failure of the usufructuary to enjoy the property in
usufruct until six months after the date on which the
provision of usufruct became effective,
In the event of the accomplishment of the special
purpose for the accomplishment of which the provision
of usufruct has been made,
In the event that the property obtained under the
provision of usufruct is transferred to the usufructuary
in accordance with law,
In the event of total loss of the property obtained under
the provision of usufruct.
In the event of the extinguishment of the provision of
usufruct pursuant to sub-section (1), the property given to any
person in usufruct shall ipso facto devolve on the owner except in
the circumstance set forth in clause (f) or (g).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), if a property is given in usufruct on the condition that it shall
remain valid until any person attains a certain age, the provision of
usufruct shall remain valid until the date on which the person
attains that age even if the person dies before the date of attainment
of such age, as if he or she were surviving.
367. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within six months after the date of knowledge of the commission of
such an act or action.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Servitudes
368. Servitude to be deemed: (1) If there is a provision of enjoyment or
use by the owner of another property of any immovable property or
any part thereof in which another person has right, ownership or
possession pursuant to this Chapter, provision of servitude shall be
deemed to have been created.
A servitude shall be in existence in accordance with the
contract, nature of the place where the immovable property is
situated, custom or practice exercised since ancient time therein.
369. Use of provision of servitude to be allowed: (1) If there is a
provision of servitude pursuant to Section 368, the owner of the
concerned immovable property shall allow another person to enjoy
or use the immovable property in accordance with the provision of
servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if there is a provision of servitude for public purpose, such a
servitude may also be used for personal purpose.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a servitude created by operation of law may be used in
accordance with law.
370. Servitude not to be adversely affected by transfer of immovable
property: (1) A servitude in a servient immovable property shall
continue to exist even if the owner of such a immovable property
transfers all or any of such property to another person in any
manner.
Even if the servient immovable property is partitioned,
each coparcener shall be deemed to have provided such a servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), if in transferring or partitioning the servient immovable
property, there is a provision of servitude elsewhere in such
property and servitude is not thus required to be provided in the
immovable property in which a person acquires right by way of
such transfer or partition, the servitude shall be deemed to have
been extinguished to that extent.
371. To allow enjoyment or use: (1) If any land, despite that a person
has right, ownership or possession in it, has been in use since
ancient time as a public or community road, cattle exit, pasture land,
ditch, cannel, quay, pond, public road, sewage, track road or main
road, public shelter, tomb, graveyard, shrine, temple, monastery,
dome, mosque, Idgaha, Karbala, Kabristan or church, community
school, hospital or similar other public monument or site, the land
shall be allowed to be used by the concerned persons accordingly
for the particular purpose.
The owner or possessor of the servient land shall not
cultivate or use, make any structure in, or otherwise own or possess,
it in such manner as to adversely affect the provision set forth in
sub-section (1).
372. Use of neighbor's house or land at time of disaster: If, at the time
of disaster such as fire, earthquake, volcano and flood, it is not
possible to rescue victims of such disaster without entering or using
the house or land of a person, the victims may be rescued, or caused
to be rescued, by entering the house or land with the consent of the
owner of the house or land if the owner is available, and even
without consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is
not available for the time being or refuses to give consent.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "the
owner of the house or land" means the person who is using,
possessing or controlling the concerned house or land for the time
being.
373. Acquisition of servitude of passage: (1) If the passage originally
available to have access to and from a house or land is destroyed
subsequently due to a disaster, the person who has been using the
passage to and from such house or land from the past shall have the
servitude of a reasonable passage to the public road.
A person shall not be entitled to demand the servitude
of passage from the owners of all surrounding houses or land
pursuant to sub-section (1), and he or she may demand such a
servitude from the owner of the house or land through which the
distance to the public road is the shortest.
374. Prohibition of transfer of house or land without provision of
passage or exit:(1) In setting aside and transferring any part of the
house or land with the provision of passage or exit, such a house or
land shall not be transferred without making provision of passage or
exit to both the purchaser and the seller.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if there is another passage or exit to and from such house or land, it
is not required to make provision of passage or exit.
375. Power to extend basic services: If it is not possible to provide
basic services such as sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas and
telephone service to the house of a person through his or her own
land or public, government or community land, the person shall be
entitled to lay pipe or line in the neighbor's land in such manner as
not to cause any loss or damage to the owner of such land.
376. Power to use river or stream or river or stream bank: Any
person may carry out movement, navigation, boating or fishing in
the river or stream which is situated in, or originated from, the
personal property of any person or within the zone of a maximum
of four meters in either side of such river or stream.
Provided that such activity is not allowed in small rivulets
that do not have perennial flow of water.
377. Power to use exit road: (1) If a river or stream is diverted or a
reservoir is built or a dam is made for any reason in the river or
stream, the owner of the concerned land shall provide a reasonable
exit for the public and livestock to have access to and from such
diversion, reservoir or dam.
If, in maintaining the provision of exit passage referred
to in sub-section (1), it is possible to maintain such exit passage
through the land of more than one person, the exit passage shall,
unless provided otherwise, be maintained through the nearest land
that is technically feasible for the access to the diversion, reservoir
or dam though that passage.
378. Prohibition of preventing natural flow of water: (1) Every house
or land owner shall himself or herself manage the rain water flow
from his or her house or land.
If there is no provision referred to in sub-section (1),
the rain water shall be allowed to make its natural course.
Provided that no water shall be let to so flow as to cause
adverse effect on the downstream land by making a ditch,
controlling floods or otherwise diverting the flow or through human
intervention.
379. Power to use stream, river or pond water: Any person may use
the water of a stream, river or pond, which is originated from, flows
through or situated in, the land of another person for the purpose of
irrigation and drinking, after the use of such water by the concerned
owner.
Provided that in making such use, the adjoining neighbor
shall have priority.
380. Requirement to allow passage or exit for farming: (1) If a person
does not have a passage or exit for people or livestock to have
access to and from his or her farm land and needs such passage or
exit, the owner of the concerned land shall provide the facility of
passage or exit to such a person.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to provide such a
passage or exit through the house and compound land.
A person who uses the passage or exit pursuant to subsection (1) shall so use it that no loss or damage is caused to the
crops or other property of the person providing such a passage or
exit.
381. Compensation to be paid: If, in using a house or land belonging to
another person, any kind of loss or damage is caused to any one for
the purposes set forth in Sections 372, 373, 375, 377 and 380, the
person using the passage or exit shall pay a reasonable
compensation to the concerned house or landowner.
382. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within six months after the date of knowledge of such an act or
action.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to House Rent
383. House deemed to be rented: If a person who has right, possession
or ownership in a house lends, for a rent, the house to another
person to use it for a certain period of time, the person shall be
deemed to rent the house.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"house" means any house, storey, unit or room of the house, or land
or cartilage occupied by such a house.
384. Prohibition of renting unsafe house: (1) No person shall rent or
take on rent a house which is not safe for human habitation from
health and security perspectives.
The quality standards of a house for non-residential
purpose such as a warehouse, livestock farming, storage and cold
storage shall be as specified in the house rent agreement.
385. Period of house rent: (1) The period of house rent shall be as set
forth in the agreement, not exceeding five years.
Provided that if a house is rented for a commercial purpose, it
shall be as set forth in the agreement.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
after the expiration of the period of house rent, the period may be
extended at times with the consent of the house owner and the
tenant.
386. Agreement to be concluded while renting: (1) While renting a
house, its owner shall enter into an agreement in writing with the
tenant, setting out the following matters:
Full name and address of the owner and of the
tenant, their citizenship number, and passport or
identification certificate, in the case of a foreigner,
Place and plot number of the land where the house
is located,
Purpose for rent,
Date of commencement of rent,
Validity period of rent,
Monthly rent,
Time and mode of payment of rent,
Liability to pay tariffs of electricity, water supply,
telephone etc. used in the house,
Matter on payment of house rent tax,
If the rented house is to be insured, matter relating
thereto,
Matter on leaving the rented house and eviction of
the tenant from it,
Matter as to whether the rented house can be
sublet to another, and
Other necessary matters.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
it is not necessary to enter into an agreement in writing with the
tenant if the monthly house rent does not exceed twenty thousand
rupees.
The tenant's photograph shall also be affixed to the
agreement referred to in sub-section (1).
The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall also
be signed by at least two witnesses of each side, namely the house
owner and the tenant, and a copy thereof shall be retained each by
the owner and the tenant.
After the completion of the procedures referred to in
sub-section (4), an agreement shall be deemed to be entered into
between the house owner and the tenant.
387. Details of house to be provided: In renting a house, the owner
shall, at the time of entering into agreement, disclose the weakness
or fault, if any, in the structure of the house to the tenant.
388. Preparation of description of goods or chattels: (1) The houseowner shall, prior to renting his or her house, prepare a description
of the goods or chattels in the house to be rented.
If the tenant is to use the goods or chattels set forth in
the description prepared pursuant to sub-section (1), he or she shall
receive such goods or chattels and give a receipt thereof to the
house-owner.
389. Obligations of house owner: The obligations of the house-owner
shall be as follows:
To allow the tenant to use the house in accordance with
the agreement,
To arrange for such water and electricity supply,
sewerage and sanitation in the rented house as may be
required, except as otherwise provided for in the
agreement,
To prevent the tenant from insecurity, harassment or
unrest from other persons dwelling in the house,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
390. Obligations of tenant: The obligations of the tenant shall be as
follows:
To pay the rent to the house owner within the specified
period,
To maintain sanitation in, take care of (herchaha),
protect and safeguard the rented house properly and
reasonably, as if it were his or her own,
Not to do any act such as causing unrest, harassment or
insecurity to the other dwellers in the house or
neighbors,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
391. Mode and procedure of payment of rent: (1) The tenant shall pay
the rent to the house owner in accordance with the mode and
procedure set forth in the agreement.
If the agreement does not provide for any mode and
procedure of the payment of rent pursuant to sub-section (1), the
tenant shall pay the rent to the house owner within seven days of
the expiry of each month.
The rent may be paid by way of cheque or cash
pursuant to sub-section (2).
If the owner receives the rent in cash pursuant to this
Section, he or she shall give a receipt thereof to the tenant.
392. Obligation to pay tax and other charge: (1) Except as otherwise
set forth in the agreement, it shall be the obligation of the house
owner to pay the tax and other charge leviable by law in relation to
the house rented.
If it is the obligation of the land owner to pay tax or
charge pursuant to sub-section (1) and the house owner fails to pay
the tax or charge in time, the tenant may pay such tax or charge.
If the tenant pays the tax or charge pursuant to subsection (2), he or she shall be entitled to deduct such an amount
from the rent payable to the house owner.
393. Insurance of house to be procured: (1) A tenant who rents a
house for industrial or business purpose shall procure the insurance
of the house for its security.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"industrial or business purpose" means the operation of any
industry or carrying on a business or trade by having a departmental
store or one or more than one shop.
If the person obliged to procure insurance pursuant to
sub-section (1) fails to procure insurance of the house and the house
is damaged by such cause as disaster, unrest, riot or fire, the tenant
shall be liable for such damage.
394. Repair and maintenance of house rented:(1) Except as otherwise
set forth in the agreement, the tenant shall be obliged to repair and
maintain the rented house, as required.
If the agreement provides that the house owner is
obliged to repair and maintain the rented house and it is necessary
to carry out any repair and maintenance of the house, the tenant
shall give a notice in writing to the house owner in time.
If the land-owner fails to repair and maintain the rented
house despite the notice given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
tenant may repair and maintain such a house.
The tenant shall be entitled to deduct the billed amount
of expenses incurred in the repair and maintenance of the house
carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) from the rent payable to the
house owner.
Except as otherwise agreed upon between the house
owner and the tenant in respect of the repair and maintenance of the
house, the tenant shall, prior to carrying out repair and maintenance
under sub-section (4), prepare a cost estimate of the repair and
maintenance and give its written information to the house owner in
advance of fifteen days.
395. Subletting house rented to other person: (1) If the agreement
entered into with the house owner provides that the tenant may
sublet the whole or any portion of the house rented by him or her to
another person, the tenant may, subject to the agreement, sublet the
whole or any portion of such a house to another person.
If the tenant sublets the whole or any portion of the
house rented to another person pursuant to sub-section (1), the
tenant shall, no later than fifteen days, give information in writing
indicating the name and address of the sub-tenant to the houseowner.
A sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) shall pay the rent of the house or its portion to the tenant
who has so sublet.
The sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) shall, while dwelling in the rented house, abide by all
such terms and provisions as required to be abided by the tenant
pursuant to this Chapter.
If the sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) fails to act in accordance with the terms while dwelling
in the rented house or fails to maintain sanitation in, protect or
safeguard, the house or carries out any act such as causing
harassment, pain or unrest to the other dwellers of the house or
neighbors, the tenant may evict the sub-tenant from the house at
any time.
396. Prohibition of altering structure without consent: (1) Except as
otherwise provided in the agreement, the tenant shall not demolish,
remove or disorder any structure of, or add any structure to, the
rented house or otherwise alter it without the house owner's consent
in writing.
If the tenant does any act in contravention of subsection (1) and thereby causes any loss to the house-owner, the
house-owner shall be entitled to recover compensation for the loss
caused to him or her from the tenant.
397. Prohibition of using house contrary to agreement: The tenant
shall not use the house for any purpose other than that for which he
or she has rented it, without prior consent of the house-owner.
398. Alteration in agreement: The house owner and the tenant may,
with mutual consent, make necessary alteration in the house rent
agreement.
Provided that if such an agreement is registered pursuant to
this Act, alteration shall be made upon making application to the
concerned body.
399. Power to inspect: (1) The house-owner may, by an advance notice
to the tenant, inspect the rented house from time to time.
If the house-owner intends to inspect the rented house
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the tenant to
allow the house-owner to inspect the house.
400. Leaving rented house: (1) A tenant may leave the rented house
prior to the expiration of the period of rent in any of the following
circumstances:
If the house owner fails to perform his or her
obligations pursuant to Section 389,
If the tenant no longer needs the house for the purpose
for which he or she rented it,
If the house owner does any act in contravention of the
agreement or this Chapter.
If the tenant is to leave the house in the circumstance
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), except as otherwise
provided in the agreement, the tenant shall give a notice in writing
to the house-owner in advance of at least thirty-five days.
If the tenant leaves the house without giving a notice
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner shall be entitled to
deduct the rent for that period from the rent, if any, paid in advance
by the tenant and to recover the same from the tenant, failing such
advance payment.
401. Power to evict tenant: (1) The house-owner may evict the tenant
from the house in any of the following circumstances:
If the tenant fails to perform his or her obligations
pursuant to Section 390,
If the tenant commits in the rented house any offense
related activity prohibited by law,
If the house-owner needs the house for himself or
herself,
If it is necessary to repair and maintain the house by
removing inhabitants from the house,
If the rented house does not appear to be appropriate
for human habitation from the technical and health
perspectives,
If the period of house rent expires,
If the tenant does any act in contravention of the
agreement or this Chapter,
If there exists the circumstance under sub-section (5)
of Section 395.
If it is necessary to evict the tenant from the house in
the circumstance referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the
land-owner shall give a notice in writing to the tenant in advance of
at least thirty-five days.
If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house-owner is not entitled to rent
such a house to another person until three months, without using it
on his or her own.
If the house-owner is to rent such house to another
person within three months pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
previous tenant intends to rent such a house, he or she shall get
priority.
402. House rent agreement deemed to be terminated: A house rent
agreement entered into pursuant to Section 386 shall be deemed to
have been terminated in any of the following circumstances:
If the tenant leaves the house,
If the house-owner evicts the tenant from the house,
If the house-owner and the tenant cancel the agreement
with mutual consent,
If the period of house rent expires.
403. Duty to hand over goods or chattels in good condition: (1) The
tenant shall, while leaving the rented house, count the goods or
chattels in his or her custody, clean or color the house, if required,
and hand over the same in good condition to the house-owner.
If the tenant looses or damages any goods or chattel in
his or her custody, the tenant shall hand over similar goods or
chattel or pay a sum of money as per the prevailing price of such
goods or chattel to the house-owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the tenant shall not be bound to reimburse for any goods or chattel
which is depreciable or destroyable in the course of daily use or to
pay price for such goods or chattel.
404. Power to vacate house: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if a tenant disappears without paying the
rent for three months or more without notice and the tenant is not
found despite a public notice or correspondence with his or her
address or the tenant or his or her successor or agent does not
appear despite that he or she has been found, the house-owner shall
submit an application with such statement to the concerned ward
office of the Local Level.
If an application is submitted pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned ward office shall make a public notice inviting
the tenant to appear within a period of fifteen days.
If a notice is published pursuant to sub-section (2), the
tenant shall appear within such a period.
If such a person does not appear within the period
referred to in sub-section (3), the concerned ward office may open
and vacate the rented house, upon having the goods therein in its or
any one's custody.
If the person who has disappeared pursuant to subsection (3) returns or sends his or her agent within six months, the
concerned ward office shall collect the due rent from, and return the
goods to him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the concerned ward office of the Local Level does not
take any action even within one month of the application submitted
to it, the concerned house-owner shall submit an application to the
concerned ward office and the nearby police office, and execute a
deed and open the house in witness of a police employee and at
least two local persons, and hand over the custody of the tenant's
goods to the police.
405. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within six months after the date on which such an act was done or
action was taken.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Donation and Gift
406. Donation or gift deemed to be effected: (1) If a person grants free
of cost a property in which the person has right and ownership to
another person or for any religious, social, public or community
purpose such an act shall be deemed to be a donation.
If a person grants free of cost a property in which the
person has right and ownership to another person as a reward, prize
or tip in consideration for merits to him or her by that other person
by way of fostering him or her or otherwise or for family love or
affection such an act shall be deemed to be a gift.
In effecting a donation or gift pursuant to sub-section
(1) or (2), such a donation or gift may be so effected that it is
effective immediately or after a certain period or after the death of
its maker.
If a donation or a gift becomes effective only after the
death of the maker of such donation or gift, it shall be deemed that
he or she has executed a testamentary donation or testamentary gift.
407. Property may be donated by pronouncement: A person may
donate a certain amount or property for any specific purpose by
making pronouncement in writing or publicly in a public function
organized for that purpose.
Provided that no lawsuit may be made if the person does not
transfer the property so donated by him or her.
408. Voidance of donation or gift: Any donation or gift made pursuant
to this Chapter shall ipso facto be void in any of the following
circumstances:
If the person entitling to donation or gift does not
accept the donated or gifted property himself or herself
or through his or her agent,
If a property is donated or gifted to a person with
entitlement after testament and the receiver of donation
or gift dies before the person making such a donation
or gift or the organization obtaining donation or gift is
dissolved,
If a property is donated or gifted to an unborn baby and
the baby is not born alive,
If the donated or gifted property is so destroyed that its
existence is extinct before the donation or gift becomes
effective.
409. Donation or gift to be voidable:(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, a donation or gift may be voided in
any of the following circumstances:
If a person donates or gifts a property in which another
has right and ownership,
If any property is donated or gifted without obtaining
the consent of another person where such consent is
needed pursuant to law,
If the maker of the donation or gift is an incompetent
or quasi-competent person,
If the donation or gift is made without fulfilling the
legal requirements.
In the case of a donation or gift made without the
consent of another person pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1)
where such consent is required, the property shall be void to the
extent of such consent not taken.
410. Power to amend or revoke deed of gift with testament: (1) The
maker of gift with testament may, if he or she so wishes, amend the
terms of, or revoke, the deed of gift with testament executed by him
or her at any time, by making an application in person before the
concerned authority.
In amending or revoking the deed of gift with
testament pursuant to sub-section (1), such a person shall appear
before the concerned authority, execute a separate deed and then
amend or revoke such a deed of gift with testament.
The deed revoking or amending the deed of gift with
testament pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be executed in
fulfillment of the procedures applicable to the execution of the deed
of gift with testament.
No person may grant a property once granted to any
one by executing the deed of gift with testament to other person by
executing such a deed, without revoking the earlier deed of gift
with testament pursuant to this Section.
If a deed of gift with testament is executed in
contravention of sub-section (4), the deed of gift with testament
executed earlier shall ipso facto be valid.
411. Not to obtain property under deed of gift with testament: If the
receiver of gift with testament is convicted to have committed any
criminal offense against the maker of such a gift before the deed of
gift with testament becomes effective, the receiver shall not be
entitled to obtain the property under such a deed.
412. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, within two
years after the date of maturation of one's right in donation or gift
received by one and after the date of possession and enjoyment
upon maturity of right in a donation or gift incapable of being made,
and, in relation to the other cases, within one year after the date of
knowledge of any act done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter,
by a person who is aggrieved from such an act or action.

Chapter-11
Provisions Relating to Transfer and Acquisition of Property
413. Property deemed to be transferred: If a person sells, donates,
gifts or otherwise transfers a property in which he or she has right
and ownership to another person, the property shall be deemed to
have been transferred to that other person.
414. Property may be transferred: (1) Any person, other than a person
who is not competent to make contract pursuant to this Act or laws
in force, may, subject to this Act, transfer a property in which he or
she has right and ownership to one or more than one person jointly
or severally.
The competency or incompetency referred to in subsection (1) shall be determined on the basis of whether he or she
was competent or incompetent at the time of the transfer of property
by him or her.
A person may, pursuant to sub-section (1), transfer a
property in which he or she has right and ownership to another
person with immediate or testamentary effect.
In transferring a property pursuant to this Section, a
deed shall be executed in fulfillment of the legal requirements.
Provided that:
It is not required to execute a deed to donate or gift any
movable property or cash amounting up to one hundred
thousand rupees.
Sale or otherwise transfer of a movable property shall
be made in accordance with the laws in force.
415. Power of guardian or curator to sell property: (1) A guardian or
curator may, subject to this Act, sell and transfer a property for the
rights, interests and protection of the person under his or her
guardianship or curatorship.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
except as otherwise provided in this Act, no immovable property
may be sold without permission of the court.
416. Ownership devolving on transferee of property: (1) If any
person transfers his or her property to another person pursuant to

Section 414, his or her ownership in that property shall cease to
exist from the date of such transfer and the transferee shall have
ownership in such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person transfers the right in his or her property to be effective
with testament, the transferee shall have ownership in such property
only after the death of the transferor.
If two or more persons acquire the same property, they
shall have that much entitlement to such property in proportion to
their respective portion.
If a deed does not indicate the portion to which a
person is entitled on the acquisition of a property, all the persons
acquiring the property shall be deemed to have acquired it equally.
417. Power to transfer private property: A person may transfer his or
her private property to another person without any one's consent.
418. Joint property may be sold by way of sale: (1) A joint property
may be sold and transferred with the consent of all of its owners.
Even though all the owners do not agree to transfer the
joint property pursuant to sub-section (1), any owner may transfer
the property of his or her right or portion.
If, in making a transfer pursuant to sub-section (1), it is
technically not possible to separate the right or portion of any
owner from the joint property, and another owner intends to acquire
such property, that other owner shall be entitled to obtain it at the
price mutually agreed upon between the owners.
If more than one owner intend to acquire the joint
property, the owner who agrees to pay the highest price shall be
entitled to obtain such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if the other owners do not intend to acquire the right or portion of
any owner and it is not possible technically to separate such
property and, the whole of the joint property shall be sold and the
proceeds of sale shall be divided between the owners according to
their respective right or portion in that property.
If any person transfers the joint property in
contravention of sub-section (1), only the transfer of the extent of
his or her right or portion in such property shall be valid, and the
concerned person shall be entitled to get return of the property
transferred in excess of the right or portion of the transferor.
419. Prohibition of transferring property in common without
obtaining consent: (1) No person shall, without obtaining written
consent of the coparceners in common, transfer a property in
common to another person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a coparcener of the joint family is a witness to the deed of
transfer of a property in common, consent of that coparcener shall
be deemed to have been obtained.
If any person transfers a property in common in
contravention of sub-section (1), the transfer of title only to the
extent of such right or portion that person has in that property shall
be valid. The concerned coparcener shall be entitled to get back the
property transferred in excess of such right or portion.
420. Property in common may be sold for household purpose:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 419, the person
acting as the head of family may, for the household purpose, sell
whole of the property in common, in the case of a movable property,
and the half of such property, in the case of an immovable property,
without consent of the others.
421. Prohibition of transferring other's property: (1) No person shall
transfer a property to another person in which any one else has right
and ownership.
If any person transfers a property in contravention of
sub-section (1), such a deed or transaction shall be void.
If the real owner makes a claim in the property
transferred pursuant to sub-section (1), the transferee of such
property shall return it to the concerned owner.
If a person finds any lost or stolen property, the owner
of such property may claim it, along with evidence showing his or
her ownership, within three years after the date on which the
property was lost or stolen.
If any person claims such property pursuant to subsection (4), the finder of that property shall return it to the owner,
by collecting the amount of expenses, if any, incurred in its
preservation or maintenance.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
if a person has acquired any stolen or lost property by way of
purchase at a public market or auction or bidding made publicly by
any person or body, the person shall not be bound to return such
property to the real owner unless and until he or she obtains the real
value of such property and the fees or amount, if any, paid by him
or her in the acquisition of such property.
422. Prohibition of transferring property in duplication: (1) No
person shall re-transfer to another person a property which he or she
has already transferred to some other person.
If any person transfers a property in contravention of
sub-section (1), the deed of transfer registered at an earlier date
shall get legal validity if the transfer of an immovable property has
been made, and if the transfer of a movable property has been made,
the transfer to the person who acquires the property earlier shall be
valid.
423. Donation or gift incapable of being effected by guardian or
curator: No guardian or curator may donate or gift any property
belonging to the person under his or her guardianship or curatorship
to any person.
424. Entitlement to amount or compensation in event of deprivation
of enjoyment of property: (1) If a person transfers a property by
way of sale pursuant to this Chapter and the purchaser is deprived
of enjoying the property wholly or partly because of such transfer
being invalid for any reason, the purchaser shall be entitled to
recover from the transferor the amount paid by him or her for the
property to the extent that he or she is so deprived of enjoying, an
interest to be set by yearly ten percent of the amount and the
registration fee or other amount, if any, he or she has paid for the
transfer of that property as if it were an unsecured bond (Kapali).
If any person makes any structure in a property
purchased pursuant to this Chapter and is not able to enjoy that
property because of such transfer being invalid for any reason, that
person may demolish and take away the structure made by him or
her within six months.
If any person is aggrieved from the transfer of a
property in contravention of Sections 419, 421 and 422 or the
failure to demolish and take away any structure pursuant to subsection (2), such a person shall also be entitled to a reasonable
compensation for actual loss and damage suffered by him or her
from such transferor, in addition to the amount referred to in subsection (1).
If a person who may be entitled to a donation or who is
entitled to a donation or gift is aggrieved from being unable to use
the property for any reason under this Chapter, the person shall be
entitled to get a reasonable compensation from the person making
donation or gift, subject to the other Sections of this Chapter.
Provided that compensation cannot be recovered in the case
of a testamentary gift being void.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a person who obtains a property in any of the following
circumstances shall not be entitled to recover the amount referred to
in sub-sections (1), (3) and (4):
If he or she has obtained the property knowingly
that it was other’s property or a stolen property,
If he or she has obtained the property knowingly
that it was already transferred to another person.
425. Right in property may be transferred by attorney: (1) If a
person appoints another person, who is competent to be an attorney
in accordance with law, as his or her authorized attorney indicating
the reason that he or she is not able to appear in person before the
concerned office in order to sell and transfer his or her immovable
property, such an authorized attorney may, on his or her behalf, sell
and transfer his or her property to another person.
A person may sell his or her movable property through
his or her attorney or agent.
426. Procedure to be followed by body corporate while purchasing
or transferring property: (1) If, in transferring an immovable
property held in the name of a body corporate established in
accordance with law, the board of directors of such a body gives
power by a decision to any member of the board of directors or
employee of such a body to transfer the property, such a person
may transfer the property on behalf of such a body.
If the procedure referred to in sub-section (1) is
fulfilled while purchasing or otherwise obtaining an immovable
property in the name of a corporate body, the property may be
purchased or obtained in the name of such a body.
427. Property may be purchased or obtained by other person on
one’s behalf: If, except the circumstance set forth in Section 426, a
person who purchases or obtains a property in accordance with this
Chapter is, for any reason, unable to appear in person before the
concerned office and gives a power of attorney, accompanied by his
or her citizenship certificate, to a person who is competent to be an
attorney by law in relation to the purchase or obtainment of the
property, such an attorney may purchase or obtain the property in
the name of that person.
428. Property may be purchased or obtained in the name of
incompetent or quasi-competent person: A guardian or curator
may acquire any property by way of donation, gift, purchase or
otherwise for incompetent, quasi competent minor or a guardian or
member of undivided family for the baby in the womb under his or
her guardianship or curatorship.
429. Registration and deregistration of property right in which is
transferred in testament: (1) If a person transfers his or her right
in a property to another person with testamentary effect and such
transferor of property dies, one who obtains the property shall
submit an application, accompanied by the death registration
certificate as well as other evidences, to the concerned office for the
transmission of the property to him or her, within six months after
the date of the transferor’s death.
If an application is submitted pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned office shall examine the deed maintained in it
and make necessary inquiry as to whether the deed executor has
died or not and the deed is void or not.
If, upon an inquiry made pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the transferor of the property has died and has not got
the deed voided, such property shall be transmitted to the applicant.
If any person submits an application to the office for
the transmission after the expiration of the time-limit referred to in
sub-section (1), the office shall transmit such property to the
applicant in accordance with such a deed, by collecting the fees by
five hundred rupees for each year after the expiration of the timelimit.
430. Not to claim for damage, destroy or low quality: A person who
has once purchased a property from another person shall not be
entitled to make a claim that such property is damaged, destroyed
or of low quality.
Provided that if the seller has sold the property by
misrepresentation or with deviation from the particulars set forth in
the deed, the purchaser shall be entitled to compensation for the
same.
431. Property may be exchanged: (1) Any person may exchange his or
her property with another person with or without adding any
amount.
A deed shall be executed in accordance with law in
exchanging a property pursuant to this Act.
432. Restriction on transfer of immovable property to foreigner: (1)
No person shall, without obtaining prior permission of the
Government of Nepal, transfer any immovable property to a
foreigner but for the person who has acquired the non-resident
citizenship of Nepal, it will be according to prevailing law.
If any person transfers any immovable property to a
foreigner in contravention of sub-section (1), the relevant deed shall
ipso facto be void, and such property shall devolve on the
Government of Nepal.
The amount invested by the creditor in the obtainment
of an immovable property pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).
433. Foreigner to transfer partition share or inheritance, if any
obtained: (1) If any foreigner obtains a partition share in or
succeeds to any immovable property in Nepal, the property shall
not be eligible to be transferred to or registered in his or her name
nor shall he or she be entitled to enjoy the income of that property,
except where so permitted by the Government of Nepal.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to a person who
has obtained non-resident Nepali citizenship.
Any foreigner who obtains any partition share or
succession pursuant to sub-section (1) shall transfer such property
to a citizen of Nepal in any manner, and the concerned office shall,
for that purpose, issue a provisional landownership registration
certificate valid for the day of transfer of right.
If the foreigner fails to transfer a partition share or
succession obtained in his or her name pursuant to sub-section (1)
to a citizen of Nepal pursuant to sub-section (2) at any time, in the
case of the partition share, and within three years of its obtainment,
in the case of succession, the Government of Nepal shall have right
in such property after the expiration of that time-limit.
434. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, at any time in
the case of Section 432, and, in relation to the other cases, within
six months after the date of knowledge of any act done or action
taken pursuant to this Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from
such act or an action.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Mortgage of Immovable Property
435. Property deemed to be mortgaged: (1) If a debtor gives the whole
or any portion of an immovable property in which the debtor has
right, ownership or possession to a creditor in consideration for a
loan which the debtor borrows from the creditor, entitling the
creditor to possess that property with effect from the date of
execution of the deed or after a certain period, such property shall
be deemed to have been given in mortgage.
If the deed provides that the creditor is entitled to
possess the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1) with
immediate effect at the time of lending or after a certain period,
such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a mortgage with possession
(Bhogbandaki), and if the deed provides that the creditor is entitled
to possess the property in the event of the debtor’s default on
repayment of the loan within the deadline set by the creditor and the
debtor for repayment, such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a
mortgage without possession (Drishtibandhaki).
A property to be mortgaged shall be of such nature as
may be capable of being enjoyed by the mortgagee.
A person shall not mortgage a property in which he or
she has not right, ownership or possession or which he or she will
acquire in the future.
436. Deed to be executed: (1) A deed shall be executed in accordance
with law for mortgaging any property pursuant to this Chapter.
A person executing the deed of mortgage shall be
competent in accordance with law.
437. Mortgaged property to be possessed and enjoyed: (1) The
creditor shall possess and enjoy the property in mortgage with
possession from the date of execution of the deed thereon or from a
particular date, if any, specified in the deed, and the property in
mortgage without possession within two years of the expiration of
the date for repayment of loan by the debtor.
If, for any reason, the creditor is not able to possess
and enjoy such property within the period referred to in sub-section
(1) or if the debtor does not allow, by any means, the creditor to
possess and enjoy it, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance
with law for effecting the possession and enjoyment of such
property.
If the creditor fails to possess and enjoy the property
pursuant to sub-section (1) or to make a lawsuit for effecting its
possession and enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2), such a
mortgage shall ipso facto be inoperative.
If the deed of a mortgage becomes inoperative pursuant
to sub-section (3), the deed shall be equivalent to an unsecured
bond (Kapali).
438. Possessory right in mortgaged property to be deemed
transferred: If any person mortgages any property, the possessory
right in such property shall be deemed to have been transferred to
the creditor from the date of its possession and enjoyment by the
creditor.
439. Entitlement to possess as if it belonged to oneself: (1) The
creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy the property
mortgaged to him or her and fruit, benefit and facility brought out
from such property as if the same were his or her own property.
If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
property mortgaged to him or her because of its incapability of
being transferred or of any hindrance or obstruction by the debtor,
the debtor shall pay a reasonable compensation to the creditor for
the same.
440. Duty to take reasonable care of (herbichar) mortgaged
property: (1) After acquiring possessory right in the mortgaged
property, the creditor shall take a reasonable care and protection of
that property as if it were his or her own.
The creditor himself or herself shall pay the tax or
charge, if any, payable by law for the possession and enjoyment of
the mortgaged property.
Provided that the debtor shall pay the land revenue payable
by law.
If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
mortgaged property because of any hindrance or obstruction by any
person other than the debtor, the creditor may make a lawsuit in
accordance with law for its possession and enjoyment.
441. Interest, charge or fee not to be collected: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, no creditor who has lent
money against the security of mortgage with possession in a
property shall collect any kind of interest, charge or fee in
consideration of such loan from the debtor.
After the creditor has acquired possession in the
property of mortgage without possession, the creditor shall not
collect any kind of interest, charge or fee in consideration for such
loan.
442. Period for possession and enjoyment of property in mortgage
with possession: (1) Except as otherwise provided in the deed of
mortgage, no property in mortgage with possession may be
possessed and enjoyed for a period exceeding ten years.
If the property in mortgage with possession is not
redeemed within the period referred to in sub-section (1), the deed
of mortgage shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond.
443. Maximum period of mortgage without possession: (1) No period
of a mortgage without possession in a property shall exceed five
years.
No creditor is entitled to take action for effecting
possession in the property in mortgage without possession or
having recovery of the related loan from the debtor prior to the
completion of the period referred to in sub-section (1).
After the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
(1), the property may be possessed for a period not exceeding ten
years.
If the property given in mortgage without possession is
not redeemed within the period of ten years after the possession
pursuant to sub-section (3), the relevant deed shall be equivalent to
an unsecured bond.
444. Redemption of mortgaged property at any time: The debtor may,
at any time, redeem his or her property from the creditor by
repaying the loan, in the case of a property given in mortgage with
possession, and also the interest, if any, payable on the loan, in the
case of a property given in mortgage without possession, to the
creditor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the property in mortgage is a cultivable land and the creditor has
already planted crops in such a land at the time of redemption, the
creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy such crops except as
otherwise agreed upon between the creditor and the debtor.
445. Property in mortgage may be remortgaged: (1) A person who
has obtained a property in mortgage shall be entitled to remortgage
such property or any part thereof to another person in consideration
for an amount which is equal to, or lesser than, the amount
specified in the deed of mortgage, and in such a case, a re-mortgage
is deemed to have been created.
Provided that a mortgaged property shall not be the object of
re-mortgage prior to the existence of the possessory right in such
property.
The period of possession and enjoyment of the remortgage given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the
period of possession and enjoyment under the mortgage.
If the debtor who has right and ownership in the
property intends to redeem the property re-mortgaged pursuant to
sub-section (1), the debtor may redeem the property upon payment
of the price directly from the re-mortgagee if the price of the remortgage is equal to the original price and through the original
mortgagee if such price is less than the original price.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the transaction of remortgage made inconsistent with the
terms of the mortgage shall ipso facto be void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
If the creditor is not entitled to possess the property remortgaged pursuant to this Chapter, the deed of such a re-mortgage
shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).
446. Fruits
benefits
property
mortgaged:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 445, a creditor who
has obtained a property in mortgage may, instead of remortgaging
the whole property, remortgage only the fruits, benefit or facility of
such property, or, if such property is a cultivable land, only the
crops, products, trees, bamboo trees, reaped or to be reaped fruits,
vegetables, flowers or any other kinds of products to be yielded
from such land.
447. Mortgaging by third party on behalf of debtor: (1) A third
person may, in consideration for a loan borrowed by a debtor,
mortgage a property in which the third person has right and
ownership to the creditor on behalf of the debtor.
The creditor shall, pursuant to this Chapter, be entitled
to possess and enjoy the property mortgaged pursuant to subsection (1) as if it were the property mortgaged by the debtor to the
creditor.
If a property is mortgaged by a third person pursuant to
sub-section (1), the relationship between the debtor and the third
person shall be governed by the deed of mortgage or other separate
contract, and in the default of such provision, such transaction shall
be equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).
448. Property in mortgage to be indivisible: (1) A property mortgaged
by a debtor to a creditor shall remain indivisible notwithstanding
the creation of more than one creditor by virtue of the partition or
succession between the creditor’s coparceners or the division
between creditor’s partners, and the debtor shall not be entitled to
redeem the whole or any portion of the mortgaged property until the
loan borrowed by him or her is repaid in full in accordance with the
deed of mortgage.
If more than one debtor are maintained by virtue of the
partition, succession between the debtor’s coparceners or division
between the debtor’s partners, the mortgaged property shall not be
liable to redemption until each debtor repays his or her respective
portion of the loan in full.
449. Creditor to be liable for loss and damage to property in
mortgage: (1) After the creation of the creditor’s possessory right
in the property in mortgage, the creditor shall be liable for any kind
of loss or damage, if any, caused to the property in mortgage.
In the event of any loss or damage to the property in
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1), the creditor shall so repair
such property, at his or her cost, as to restore it into its original form.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the creditor shall not be liable for any loss or damage to the
property in mortgage caused by a disaster, and the creditor shall
repair such loss or damage with the debtor's consent in writing.
The debtor shall, while redeeming the property in
mortgage, pay also the expenses incurred in the maintenance under
sub-section (3), in addition to the loan borrowed from the creditor.
450. Not to create trouble on property in mortgage: After the creation
of the possessory right in the property in mortgage, the creditor
shall not so trouble the debtor stating that such property is
inappropriate or inaccurate or less as to be inconsistent with the
terms of the deed.
Provided that nothing shall bar the making of a claim for the
repayment of a loan in accordance with the deed of mortgage if the
creditor is not entitled to possess the property in mortgage for any
reason or if the property is held to be defective for any reason.
451. Mortgage not to be made to foreigner: No person may mortgage
an immovable property to a foreign person other than a person
having obtained the non-resident Nepali citizenship, without prior
approval of the Government of Nepal.
452. Not to be mortgaged or transferred in duplication: (1) No
property once mortgaged may be mortgaged or transferred again, in
duplication, to other person.
If a person mortgages a property in duplication in
contravention of sub-section (1), the deed registered at an earlier
date shall be valid and the subsequent deed shall ipso facto be void.
If a deed becomes void pursuant to sub-section (2), the
amount of a creditor who knowingly executes the deed in
duplication shall lapse, and that of a creditor who executes it
without knowledge of duplication shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond (Kapali).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
in the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, and the first
deed providing for any kind of mortgage and the second deed
providing for the transfer of title, the transferee shall be entitled to
establish the title by making repayment of loan in accordance with
the first deed of mortgage.
One who executes a deed in duplication as mentioned
in this Section shall be liable to the punishment with a fine of a sum
that is equal to the amount in controversy, if any, indicated in the
second deed, to the amount indicated in the earlier deed, if such
amount in controversy is not indicated in the second deed, and a
sum not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees if no such amount
is indicated even in the earlier deed.
Provided that a fine in excess of one hundred thousand rupees
shall not be imposed irrespective of the sum of amount in
controversy.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in the event of the execution of the deed of mortgage in
duplication, possessory right shall be established within two years
from the date of the first deed if it provides for mortgage with
possession (Bhogbhandhaki) and within two years from the date of
entitlement to the possessory right if the first deed provides for
mortgage without possessory right (Drishtibandhaki).
In the event of a failure to establish the possessory
right pursuant to sub-section (6), the creditor's amount shall be
equivalent to an unsecured bond (Kapali).
453. Statute of limitation: A lawsuit may be made within the statute of
limitation, if any, specified separately in this Chapter, and, in
relation to the other cases, within a period of one year after the date
on which any act was done or action was taken pursuant to this
Chapter, by a person who is aggrieved from such an act or action.

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Pre-emption of Immovable Property
454. Pre-emption deemed to be made: If a person transfers, in any
manner, any immovable property in which that person has right,
ownership and possession to another person and anyone who is in
neighbor of such property redeems it in accordance with this
Chapter, pre-emption shall be deemed to be made.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “in
neighbor of" includes a situation where a ditch, water supply,
passage, exit etc. for one will be closed by the reason that one does
not have other’s house or land that is bordering one’s house or land
and has been transferred.
455. Entitlement of heir to pre-emption: (1) If a person sells his or her
immovable property, the heir in neighbor of such property may preempt such property upon payment of the amount paid by the buyer
of that property as well as the fees incurred in course of approval of
deed to the buyer.
If there are more than one heir who intend to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1), the nearest heir, and, if such
heirs are also more than one, the heir who is the most immediate
neighbor, and, if even such heirs are more than one, all the heirs
may pre-empt such property in equal proportion.
If the nearest heir does not pre-empt such property
pursuant to sub-section (2), the heir who is the nearest in the order
of preference may pre-empt such property.
456. Pre-emption by tenant: If there is no heir in neighbor of the
property pursuant to Section 455 or even if there is an heir, he or
she does not intend to make pre-emption and if there is a tenant in
accordance with law in such a property, the tenant may pre-empt
such property.
457. Pre-emption of sold house: (1) If there are different owners of the
different parts of the same house and the owner of a part sells his or
her part to another person, the owner of another part may, if he or
she intends to pre-empt that part, preempt such a part of the house
by paying the amount paid by the buyer and the fee incurred in the
registration of the deed to the buyer.
In making pre-emption pursuant to sub-section (1), the
following person shall get preference as follows:
If the owner of the other part is the heir, such an heir,
and if there are more than one heir, the nearest heir,
If the owner of the other part is a person other than the
heir, the owner in neighbor of or the owner of the part
adjoining such a part.
458. Pre-emption of house donated or gifted: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 455,456 or 457, if any person
relinquishes in any manner his or her right in and donates or gifts
the half part of the same house or any portion thereof or the land
occupied by or appurtenant to the house and the donee has
transferred the right in the house or land in any manner to another
person, the donor or his or her heir residing in the same place may,
if he or she so intends, pre-empt such a house or any portion thereof
or the land occupied by or appurtenant to the house.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person gets a donation or gift of the half part or any portion of
the same house or the land occupied by or appurtenant to the house
from a donor and the donor donates or gifts the remaining part of
such a house or land to another person, the former donee or giftee
or his or her heir may pre-empt such remaining part or portion.
In making pre-emption pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the figure of price, if any, indicated in the instrument of
donation or gift, and amount equal to the prevailing market price, if
such figure is not so indicated, and the fees incurred in the
registration of the deed shall be paid to the creditor.
If, there are more than one heir intending to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the nearest heir, and the
most aggrieved heir, if even the nearest heirs are more than one,
may make pre-emption.
459. Where pre-emption is not permitted: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Sections 457 and 458, any part of or house built under
the provision of joint housing shall not be subject to pre-emption.
460. Procedures for making pre-emption: (1) A person who intends to
make pre-emption of any immovable property pursuant to this
Chapter shall make a petition to the office making registration of
the relevant deed, and such a petition has to be accompanied by a
deposit of an amount equal to the price of the property to be preempted, if any, indicated in the deed registered for the transfer of
such property, or an amount equal to the prevailing market price if
such price is not indicated in the deed, and the fees charged in the
approval of registration of such a deed.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
office that approves the registration of the deed shall hold the
petitioner on recognizance and send a process of summon to the
person obliged to allow preemption to appear in the office, within a
period of seven days excluding the time required for journey.
If the person obliged to allow preemption appears and
consents to preemption within the time limit as referred to in subsection (2), the office that approves the registration of the deed shall
effect preemption by paying to him or her the amount deposited
pursuant to sub-section (1).
If, despite that the person obliged to allow preemption
does not appear and consent to preemption within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (2), it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office that approves registration of the deed shall make
decision to effect pre-emption, and if it appears that pre-emption is
not to be made, that office shall make decision not to effect preemption and give according information to the petitioner.
If the person obliged to allow pre-emption does not
appear within the time limit referred to in sub-section (2), and, after
the expiration of the time limit, if it appears from the received
petition, registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption
is to be effected, the office shall make decision to effect preemption and give an execution slip to the person entitled to pre252
emption to enjoy the property to be pre-empted, and send a notice
to the person obliged to allow preemption to receive the amount of
deposit made pursuant to sub-section (1).
If the person obliged to allow pre-emption appears
within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (2) but expresses his
or her disagreement with the market price of such property, the
office that approves the registration of the deed shall fix the market
price of that property and effect pre-emption by having the amount
equal to that market price paid to the person obliged to allow preemption.
If any party does not agree to the market price of the
property subject to pre-emption fixed pursuant to sub-section (6) or
if the person obliged to allow preemption appears within the time
limit and shows the reason why pre-emption is not to be made, and
it is necessary to decide it upon examination of evidence on the
matter, the office that approves the registration of the deed shall
inform that the concerned person may make a lawsuit in the court
within thirty-five days; and in such a case, action shall be taken
pursuant to a decision of the court if a lawsuit has been filed within
the time-limit, and pursuant to a decision of the office if no such a
lawsuit has been filed.
In returning the amount to the petitioner on holding
that pre-emption cannot be made pursuant to sub-section (4), two
and half percent of the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be deducted.
If the person who has petitioned for pre-emption does
not subsequently intend, for any reason, to make pre-emption or
fails to appear at the appointed dates, the office shall punish that
person with a fine of three percent of the amount of deposit
furnished by him or her and the amount that remains after deducting
that fine from the amount of deposit shall be returned to him or her.
461. To update records upon pre-emption: If it is held by the
concerned office or court that pre-emption can be made pursuant to
this Chapter, the office shall make entries into and update
accordingly the records of the pre-empted property maintained in
such an office.
462. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may file a lawsuit
within thirty-five days after the date of knowledge thereof not later
than six months after the date of registration of the deed.
Provided that a tenant may file a lawsuit within thirty-five
days after the date of expiration of the date within which the landowner may make pre-emption.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Approval of Registration of Deeds
463. Deed deemed to be registered: If any deed submitted by a person
to the concerned office for approval pursuant to this Chapter is
approved by such an office, such a deed shall be deemed to be
registered.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“concerned office” means such an office as may be designated by
the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
and includes the concerned Land Revenue Office until the office is
so designated.
464. Deeds to be registered: (1) In making any of the following deeds,
such a deed shall be got registered with the concerned office:
A deed transferring the right in an immovable
property in any manner,
A deed of mortgage with possession, mortgage
without possession or re-mortgage,
A deed on donation or gift of immovable property
in testament,
A deed on exchange of immovable property,
A deed on partition or relinquishment of partition
share of property in common,
A deed on separation of board and bread or
unification of board and bread,
A deed on establishment of a trust,
A deed on house renting with a monthly rent of
more than one hundred thousand rupees,
A deed on usufruct in an immovable property,
Such other deed required to be registered pursuant
to this Act or law.
If any person fails to have registered a deed required to
be registered pursuant to sub-section (1), such a deed shall not be
legally recognized.
465. Other deeds may be registered: (1) A person may, if he or she so
intends, have registered also any deed other than that set forth in

Section 464.
If a person makes an application for the approval of
registration of a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
office shall register such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.
466. Deed may be registered by commission: (1) If a person makes an
application to the concerned office for the approval of registration
of a deed by a commission deputed by the office and it appears that
such a deed can be registered by that office, the chief of office or
other employee deputed by him or her shall, on deposit with the
office of the fees chargeable for such registration, visit the location
indicated by the applicant within five days and register such a deed
by fulfilling the legal requirements.
If the deed is approved by a commission deputed
pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall credit into revenue the
deposit made pursuant to that sub-section.
If, for any reason, the deed is not approved and
registered by a commission deputed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
applicant shall get refund of the deposit within three months.
If the applicant fails to get refund of the deposit within
the time-limit referred to in sub-section (3), the office shall credit
such deposit into revenue.
467. Deed may be approved and registered with office in other
district: (1) If the parties to a deed intend to get the deed approved
and registered in a district other than the district in which either of
them resides or the property is situated, they shall make an
application, setting out the matter, to the concerned office of that
district.
If an application is made for the registration of a deed
pursuant to sub-section (1), such an office shall make necessary
inquiry into the matter and approve and register such deed by
fulfilling the legal requirements.
If a deed of immovable property is approved and
registered in other district pursuant to sub-section (2), the office
shall send a copy of the registered deed to the relevant office of the
concerned district.
468. Fee chargeable for registration of deed: (1) The fee specified by
law shall be charged for the approval and registration of a deed.
Except where the law provides for the fee of approval
and registration of a deed, fee shall be charged according to the
amount set forth in the deed dealing with transaction of money.
Provided that if the price of the immovable property referred
to in the deed is less than the minimum price specified by the
Government of Nepal, the fee shall be charged according to the
price specified by the Government of Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), in registering a deed in another district, there shall be
charged an additional fee by ten percent of the fee set forth in that
sub-section.
469. Obligation to pay fees: (1) The following person shall pay the fee
chargeable for the registration of the following deed:
In the case of a deed transferring a property or
relating to mortgage, the transferee or mortgagee,
In the case of a deed on partition or relinquishment
of partition share, separation of board and bread or
unification of board and bread, all coparceners in
equal portion,
In the case of a deed on exchange of property, both
parties to the deed,
In the case of a deed of testamentary gift, the donor
or testator,
In the case of a deed on house renting, the house
lord,
In case of a memorandum of establishment of trust,
founder of a trust,
In the case of any other deed, both parties to the
deed.
In registering the deed referred to in clause (e) of subsection (1), the fee shall be determined considering the amount of
rent of the first month receivable for house rent as the price.
470. Provision relating to payment of amount: If any amount is to be
paid and received between the parties to a deed according to the
deed intended to be approved and registered, such payment may be
effected either in household or in presence of the concerned
employee of the office or by a good for payment cheque.
471. Transmission and registration and de-registration to be made:
(1) If any transmission has to be effected in consequence of a deed
registered, the concerned office shall execute transmission, and
registration and deregistration of the matter on the day of
registration of the deed, and on the following day if it is not
possible to do so on that day.
If any transmission and registration and deregistration
of the matter have to be made in the records of another office
according to the deed registered by one office, the latter shall give a
time-limit of thirty-five days to the transferee, thereby informing
him or her to go to the concerned office for the transmission, and
registration and deregistration of the matter, and send also the deed
to the concerned office.
On receipt of a deed sent by another district for the
transmission, and registration and deregistration of the matter
pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned office shall enter the
matter of such registration into its records and effect transmission
and registration and deregistration of the matter according to the
deed.
472. Deed registered at earlier date to be valid: In the event of
approval and registration of more than one deed in relation to the
same matter, the deed approved and registered on the earlier date
shall be valid.
473. Statute of limitation: (1) A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken pursuant to this Chapter may make a lawsuit
within six months after the date on which such an act was done or
action was taken.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a deed is approved and registered by an office of another area, a
lawsuit may be made within one year after the date of receipt by the
concerned office of a copy of such a deed.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Transactions
474. Transaction deemed to be made: (1) If there is give-and-take of
any amount or goods between two or more persons subject to any
condition, transaction shall be deemed to have been made between
them.
If a transaction is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
receiver of amount or goods shall return the same to the giver of
amount or goods.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“amount” includes the price of a goods.
475. Loan deemed to be borrowed: If a person has an obligation to pay
any amount or goods to another person in any manner, such
obligation shall be deemed to be a loan borrowed by that person,
and such a person shall return such amount or goods to the
concerned person, subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
476. Transaction not to be carried on without executing deed: No
person shall carry on transaction without executing a deed in
accordance with law.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“deed” means any document that substantiates a transaction
including a cheque, bill, voucher and receipt.
477. Matters to be set out in deed: In carrying on a transaction, the
following matters shall be set out in the deed according to the
nature of transaction:
Name, surname, age and address of each person
involved in transaction, and name of his or her
father, mother, grand-father and grand-mother,
Provided that in the case of a married person, the
name of his or her husband or wife, as the case may
be, shall also be mentioned.
Reason for transaction,
Volume of transaction,
In the case of transaction of any good, price of such
goods,
In the case of exchange of any goods by way of
borrowing, loan or otherwise, the matter to that
effect,
Details of the goods, if any, exchanged,
Date for repayment of the transacted amount,
Rate of interest, if any, payable on the transaction,
Matter that the creditor may recover the amount
involved in the transaction from the borrower's
assets in the event of failure to repay such amount
within the specified time or to fulfill the other
conditions set forth in the deed,
Place of the deed executed,
Date of the deed executed,
Such other matters as required to be set out
according to the nature of transaction.
478. Entitlement of creditor to interest from debtor: (1) If a deed on
transaction provides for the payment of interest, the creditor may
collect the interest from the debtor as set forth in the deed.
The amount of interest which the creditor is entitled to
collect from the debtor pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed
ten percent of the principal per annum.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) does
not provide for the rate of interest but only for the payment of
interest, the creditor may collect interest from the debtor at the rate
of ten percent of the principal per annum.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1)
provides for the payment of profit instead of interest but does not
specify the amount of such profit, the creditor may collect such
profit from the debtor as if it were interest.
479. Creditor not allowed to collect interest from debtor: If the deed
on transaction does not provide for the payment of interest, the
creditor shall not collect interest from the debtor.
480. Compound interest not to be collected: (1) The creditor shall not
collect compound interest from the debtor.
If any creditor collects compound interest from a
debtor in contravention of sub-section (1), such interest shall be
deducted from the principal and refunded if the principal has
already been repaid.
481. Interest
excess
principal
collected:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
creditor shall not collect interest in excess of the principal.
482. Procedures to be fulfilled in paying and collecting principal and
interest: The following procedures shall be fulfilled in paying and
collecting interest:
If the debtor repays the whole of the principal and
interest, the creditor shall sign and return the deed on
transaction to the debtor by tearing out the deed or
indicating on its space or reverse side that the loan has
been repaid,
If the deed is not found at the time of repayment of the
principal and interest pursuant to clause (a), the
creditor shall give the debtor a receipt indicating the
receipt of the particular amount on the particular date,
In repaying some amount out of the principal and
interest, the creditor shall indicate on the reverse side
of the deed how much he or she has received from the
debtor on which date, and get the debtor to sign the
deed and issue a separate receipt of amount
accordingly if the deed is not found immediately or it
is not with the creditor for the time being.
483. Interest accruable as of the date of recovery of amount:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
the court passes a judgment on a lawsuit, if any, made within the
period under Section 484 entitling the creditor to recover interest as
well, the creditor shall be entitled to the interest as of the date of
recovery according to the judgment.
484. Period of deed executed in household: (1) The period of a deed
executed in household pursuant to this Chapter shall not exceed ten
years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the debtor repays some of the principal or interest thereon to the
creditor or the term of a deed is extended for the repayment of
principal or interest within the period of ten years, another period of
ten years shall be extended from the date of such repayment of
principal or interest or extension of the period, as the case may be.
485. Transaction carried on with incompetent or quasi-competent
person not to be recognized: A transaction carried on by a person
with an incompetent or quasi-competent person shall not get legal
recognition.
486. Recovery of amount not available from property in common:
(1) If any person carries on transaction with another person and the
deed of such transaction does not bear the signature of the person
acting as the head of family, the creditor shall not be entitled to
recover his or her amount from such property until the debtor's right
in the property in common is established.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the person acting as the head of family repays such amount, the
creditor may recover the same.
If any person is not able to recover the amount from
the debtor on the occurrence of the circumstance referred to in subsection (1), the creditor shall make a lawsuit against the debtor and
maintain his or her right within a period of ten years.
In the event of the maintenance of the right with the
debtor pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor may recover his or
her amount from the debtor in accordance with law after his or her
right in the property in common has been established.
The statute of limitation for making a lawsuit shall, for
the recovery of the amount pursuant to sub-section (4), commence
from the date of establishment of the debtor's right.
487. Exchange of movable property not allowed without consent: (1)
A person of majority age in a joint family is not allowed to
exchange any movable property in common without consent of the
person acting as the head of family.
Provided that the consent of the person acting as the head of
family shall not be required to exchange his or her private property.
If a person exchanges a movable property in
contravention of sub-section (1), the exchange of such property
shall not be valid if the person acting as the head of family does not
consent to such exchange.
If there is no consent of the person acting as the head
of family to the exchange of movable property made in
contravention of sub-section (1), the property so exchanged may be
taken back within thirty-five days.
488. Recovery of amount if transaction appears to have been carried
on: Even though any person does not execute a deed by fulfilling
the procedures referred to in this Chapter, if it appears from any
deed, banking transaction, negotiable instrument, cheque, voucher
or book of account that transaction has been carried on with any
person, the court may, based on such deed, banking transaction,
negotiable instrument, cheque, voucher or book of account, order
the recovery of such amount from the debtor to the lawsuit maker.
489. Procedure to be followed if deed executed on household is lost
or destroyed due to force majeure event: (1) If a deed executed in
household is lost or destroyed due to a force majeure event, the
creditor shall make an application, setting out the matter, to the
concerned Local Level within fifteen days from the date of loss or
occurrence of the force majeure event.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned Local Level shall draw up a receipt setting out the
matter and issue the receipt, sealed with the stamp of the office, to
the applicant.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Local Level shall summon the presence of the deed executor, if
he or she is alive, and of the nearest heir, if such executor is not
alive, within seven days, and cause a deed to be prepared as per the
original deed, if he or she so consents, and authenticate such deed
and deliver it to the applicant.
If the deed executor does not consent to execute
another deed indicating that the deed was lost or destroyed due to a
force majeure event pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall
make a lawsuit and maintain his or her right, showing the evidence
of the loss of deed or occurrence of the force majeure event, within
thirty-five days of the expiry of that time-limit.
490. To return goods transacted in the event of imperfection: (1)
Except as otherwise provided for in the deed, if the receiver of any
goods transacted with specification of price is not able to possess
the goods due to the fact that the goods do not correspond to that set
forth in the deed or are imperfect for any reason, he or she shall
give a notice thereof to the giver of goods within thirty-five days of
such transaction.
If a notice is received from the receiver of goods
pursuant to sub-section (1) and his or her statement appears to be
reasonable, the exchange of goods shall be made if the giver has
similar other goods, and if the giver does not have such goods, he or
she shall get back his or her goods and cancel the deed executed in
relation to such transaction.
If the giver of goods refuses to exchange or to take
back the goods pursuant to sub-section (2), the receiver of goods
may make a lawsuit to have recovery of an amount equivalent to
the price of such goods and a reasonable compensation for the loss
and damage caused to him or her from the concerned person or get
such transaction to be void.
491. To return goods in original condition: (1) If any person obtains or
borrows for any specific purpose any goods owned or possessed by
another person whether for rent or not or for borrowing or not or on
any other terms and conditions, the person shall, after the
completion of the purpose, return the goods that are the same in
kind, quantity and quality as have been so acquired or borrowed, to
the owner or possessor.
If the goods obtained pursuant to sub-section (1) are
lost, broken, destroyed, out of order or otherwise damaged, except
as otherwise provided for in the deed, the person obtaining such
goods shall return similar other goods to the owner or possessor or
pay to the owner or possessor an amount equivalent to the
prevailing market price of such goods if similar other goods are not
available.
Except as otherwise provided for in the deed in relation
to the return of, or payment of rent or amount for, the goods
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), such goods or rent shall be
returned or paid to the owner or possessor within fifteen days after
the completion of the purpose for which the goods were obtained.
If the person obtaining the goods fails to return or pay
the goods or amount to the owner or possessor within the time-limit
under sub-section (3), the aggrieved person may recover the amount
of such goods and a reasonable compensation, as well, for the loss
caused to him or her.
492. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a lawsuit in the matter of transaction carried on with intent
to take rights to, misappropriate, cause loss to, or disorder, the
property of an incompetent and quasi-competent person or in the
matter of collection of compound interest or collection of interest in
excess of ten percent.
Except as provided for in sub-section (1), a person who
is aggrieved from any act done or action taken pursuant to this
Chapter may make a lawsuit as follows from the date of such act or
action:
Where this Chapter provides for a separate statute
of limitation for making a lawsuit, within such
limitation,
Within a period of one year from the date of
expiration of the period, if any, specified in any
deed, and failing such a deed, or in the other cases,
from the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Part-5
Provisions Relating to Contract and Other Obligations

Chapter-1
General Provisions Relating to Obligations
493. Obligation to be created: (1) If there is a legal compulsion for
one to do or to abstain from doing any act, an obligation is created
if one omits to do or does such an act.
The obligation to be created pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be maintained and determined pursuant to this Chapter.
494. Circumstances in which obligation is created: (1) The obligation
under Section 493 shall be created and maintained as follows:
By a law,
By a contract,
By an indirect or quasi-contract,
By an unjust enrichment,
By an unilateral commitment of any person to assume
obligation,
By an act to be treated as tort under law,
By an act to be treated as a quasi-tort under law.
(2) In regard to sub-section (1),
The obligation referred to in clause (a) shall be created
under this Act or other law.
The obligation referred to in clause (b) shall be created
under a contact entered into between the parties.
The obligation referred to in clause (c) shall be created
under an indirect or quasi-contact as defined in

Chapter-15 of this Part.
The obligation referred to in clause (d) shall be created
under an unjust enrichment as defined in Chapter-16 of
this Part.
The obligation referred to in clause (e) shall be
determined under provision for creating obligation
under law through an unilateral commitment.
The obligation referred to in clause (f) shall be created
under torts as defined in Chapter-17 of this Part.
The obligation referred to in clause (g) shall be created
from the defective product as defined in Chapter-18 of
this Part or from other act to be deemed as a quasi-tort
under law.
495. Obligation to be fulfilled: (1) A person shall himself or herself
fulfill the obligation of any matter which has been so maintained or
created as to be fulfilled by him or her or which he or she has
undertaken to fulfill.
If such a person dies or becomes of unsound mind prior
to the fulfillment of the obligation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
heir succeeding to his or her property or his or her guardian or
curator or the guarantor in the case of a contract relating to
guarantee shall fulfill such obligation.
496. Obligation to be fulfilled within the prescribed time: (1) If a
certain period has been specified for fulfilling any obligation, the
concerned person shall fulfill such an obligation within that period.
If a certain day or time has been specified for fulfilling
any obligation, the concerned person shall fulfill such obligation on
that day or at that time.
Provided that if there is a stipulation that the obligation shall
be fulfilled within certain day or time, the obligation may be
fulfilled even prior to such day or time.
If no period, day or time has been specified under subsection (1) or (2), the period, day or time for fulfilling the
obligation shall be determined having regard to the nature of
obligation and the obligation shall be fulfilled within a reasonable
period.
If any obligation is not fulfilled pursuant to sub-section
(1), (2) or (3), the person who is bound to fulfill the obligation shall
be deemed to have not been fulfilled, or to have been unable to
fulfill, the obligation.
497. Each person to fulfill obligation: (1) If more than one person have
undertaken to fulfill an obligation or such an obligation has been
created in relation to them, every person shall, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, fulfill such an obligation equally.
If any person is bound to fulfill any obligation vis-à-vis
more than one person, he or she shall, except as otherwise provided
for in the contract, fulfill the obligation vis-à-vis every person
equally.
498. Obligation may be divisible: (1) If any obligation has to be
fulfilled vis-à-vis or by more than one person and the obligation
vis-à-vis or by such persons is capable of being divided or
fragmented, having regard to its nature, such obligation may be
divided and shall be fulfilled by or vis-à-vis every person
accordingly.
In the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), every
person or all persons may demand for the fulfillment of the
obligation by every person or all persons bound to fulfill such
obligation.
499. Obligation to be fulfilled in good faith: The person who is bound
to fulfill the obligation created pursuant to Section 494 shall fulfill
it in good faith.
500. To bear compensation for failure to fulfill obligation: (1) If a
person bound to fulfill any obligation fails to fulfill it or delays its
fulfillment, and thereby a loss or damage is caused to any other
person in any manner, such a person shall bear compensation for
the actual loss or damage so caused.
If a person bound to fulfill any obligation does not
fulfill it by fraud or does any act knowingly or recklessly, thereby
any loss or damage is caused in any manner, such a person shall
bear compensation for the loss or damage so caused.
501. Obligation contrary to law not to be fulfilled: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the fulfillment of
any obligation would be contrary to law, public order or public
morality, it shall not be required to fulfill such an obligation.
502. Impossible obligation not to be fulfilled: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if, at the time of its
creation, any obligation of such nature as is impossible for
fulfillment has been created, such an obligation shall not be
required to be fulfilled.
If any obligation which was possible for fulfillment at
the time of its creation subsequently becomes impossible for
fulfillment, the consequence of such obligation shall be determined
according to the law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), if a portion of any obligation can be fulfilled and the rest
portion cannot be fulfilled, the obligation shall be fulfilled to the
extent that it can be fulfilled.
503. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years from the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Formation of Contracts
504. Contract deemed to be made: (1) If an agreement enforceable by
law is concluded between two or more persons to do or abstain from
doing any act, a contract shall be deemed to be concluded.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a contract shall be
deemed to have been concluded once the person to whom an offer
has been made by another person communicates his or her
acceptance thereto.
Once a contract is concluded, a binding legal
relationship shall be created between the parties to it.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,
“Offer” means an offer made by one person to another
person with the intent of obtaining his or her acceptance
to do or abstain from doing any act.
“Acceptance” means the acceptance given by the person
to whom the offer has been made in the same meaning
in which the offer is made.
505. Contract enforceable by law: (1) A contract concluded in
fulfillment of the following conditions shall be deemed to be a
contract enforceable by law:
The consent expressed by a person to a contract to bind
himself or herself,
Capacity or qualification of a person to a contract to
conclude the contract,
Certain matter for the creation of an obligation,
Lawful obligation.
A contract may be made in written or verbal form or
even by conduct of the parties to it.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
there is a requirement that a particular contract be concluded in
fulfillment of any particular procedure or formality, such a contract
may not be enforceable unless such procedure or formality is completed.
506. Persons competent to concluded contract: (1) Every person other
than the following persons shall be competent to conclude a contract:
One who is a minor,
One who is of unsound mind.
Explanation:
A person who is usually of unsound mind, but
occasionally of sound mind, may conclude a contract
when he or she is of sound mind.
A person who is usually of sound mind, but occasionally
of unsound mind, may not conclude a contract when he
or she is of unsound mind.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
any person who is deemed incompetent to conclude a particular
contract under the law shall not be deemed to be a competent to
conclude such a contract.
In concluding a contract on behalf of a person who is
incompetent or quasi-competent, his or her guardian or curator may
conclude such a contract.
In concluding a contract on behalf of a legal person, it
shall be conclude by a decision of the director or directors
authorized for the management and operation of such a person or by
a person authorized by such a director or directors.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a person deemed to be incompetent to conclude a contract
under this Chapter on any particular matter is competent by other law
to conclude a contract on such a matter, such a person shall be
deemed to be competent to conclude a contract on that matter.
507. Parties to be autonomous: The parties to a contract shall, subject to
this Act, be autonomous to choose the form and contents of the
contract, to determine terms and conditions of the contact and the
nature of the remedy for its breach as well as to determine the
measures for resolving disputes arising out of it.
508. Offer and acceptance deemed to be completed: (1) Once the
offeree comes to the knowledge of an offer, the act of making the
offer shall be deemed to have been completed.
The act of giving acceptance shall be deemed to be
completed, in case of the offerer, if the offerer receives the
acceptance forwarded by the offeree to the offerer having indicated
his or her acceptance to the offer, and in case of the offeree, if the
offerer comes to know that the offeree has accepted the offer.
Even though there is no expression of acceptance to the
offer directly, if the offeree abides by any terms mentioned in the
offer by way of his or her conduct or accepts the advantage or
service mentioned in the offer or indicates acceptance in any other
manner, the offeree shall be deemed to have accepted the offer.
If the offerer makes an offer having stipulated certain
time and specifies that the offer is regarded as accepted if a notice
of its rejection is not sent within such time, and if the offeree does
not send a notice of acceptance of the offer within such time, the
offer shall not be deemed to have been accepted.
509. Offer or acceptance may be revoked: (1) The offerer may revoke
his or her offer through a notice.
Provided that, if the offerer has received from the offeree a
notice to the effect that he or she has accepted the offer before
receiving a notice of revocation of the offer, such an offer shall not
be revoked.
(2) The offeree may revoke his or her acceptance by a notice.
Provided that if the offerer has already received the notice of
acceptance before receiving the notice of its revocation, such an
acceptance shall not be revoked
The person who has sent a notice expressing his or her
refusal of the offer may again send a notice expressing his or her
acceptance to the offer.
Provided that, if the notice of refusal out of the notices of
refusal or acceptance reaches first, the contract shall not be deemed
to have been concluded, and if the notice of acceptance reaches first,
the contract shall be deemed to be concluded.
If the notice under sub-section (1) has been sent after
sending the offer, the notice under sub-section (2) has been sent
after sending acceptance or the notice under sub-section (3) has
been sent after sending a notice of refusal and the concerned person
receives such notices at the same time, the contract shall not be
deemed to have been concluded.
If the offeree sends an acceptance with condition or
with alteration to the offer sent by the offerer, the offeree shall be
deemed to after a counter offer.
510. Offer deemed to be revoked: An offer shall be deemed to been
revoked in any of the following circumstances:
If the offerer makes an offer with a condition that a
notice of acceptance to the offer be given within any
certain time, and the offerer does not receive a notice
of acceptance by the offeree within that time,
If the time for sending a notice of acceptance is not
specified pursuant to clause (a) and the offeree does
not give a notice of acceptance to the offerer within a
reasonable time,
If the offerer, after making the offer, dies or becomes
insane before receiving the acceptance,
If the offer is revoked pursuant to Section 509,
Even if the acceptance was given by the offeree, the
offeree dies or becomes insane before the offerer
receives the acceptance,
If the offeree sends a counter offer pursuant to subsection (5) of Section 509,
If the offerer makes an offer on a condition that the
offeree has to do any act or fulfill any condition before
accepting the offer, and acceptance is made without
doing such an act or fulfilling such a condition.
511. Contract according to offer made before the public: (1) If a
person makes an offer publicly by means of an advertisement that
he or she will pay certain remuneration to any person for doing any
act specified in the advertisement, and if any person does such an
act, the advertiser shall pay remuneration specified in the
advertisement to such a person.
Provided that if a person does the act specified in the
advertisement without knowing such advertisement, such a person
shall not be entitled to the remuneration.
If more than one person do the act specified in the offer
under sub-section (1), only the person who does the act first shall
be entitled to the remuneration.
Provided that if two or more persons do the act specified in
the offer at the same time, all of such persons shall be entitled to
the equal share of the remuneration, and if the remuneration is
incapable of being shared, the proceeds of the sale of the
remuneration shall be equally divided among them.
If a specific period is prescribed for doing the act
according to the advertisement published pursuant to sub-section
(1), the offer made according to the advertisement shall be deemed
to have been revoked immediately after the expiry of that period.
An offer made pursuant to sub-section (1) may be
revoked through the same medium through which it was published.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
if anyone has already done the act specified in the advertisement
under sub-section (1) before the publication of the notice of
revocation of the offer, the remuneration specified in the
advertisement shall be provided.
Provided that the person who does the act specified in the
advertisement shall notify the advertiser of the completion of the
act as soon as possible.
If any person begins to do the act specified in the
advertisement under sub-section (1) by giving its notice to the
advertiser, appropriate remuneration shall be paid to such a person
for the act done until the revocation of the advertisement.
512. Place of formation of contract: (1) The place where the offerer
sends an offer expecting to receive its acceptance shall be deemed
to be the place of formation of the contract.
If the place is not specified pursuant to sub-section (1),
the place where the offerer receives acceptance shall be deemed to
be the place of formation of the contract.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1)
and (2), if the parties specify the place of its formation in the
contract, such a place shall be deemed to be the place of formation
of the contract.
513. Contingent contract: (1) If a contract is concluded to do or not to
do any act if some event happens in the future, such a contract shall
create no obligation until such an event happens.
If a contract is so concluded as to be deemed to be
concluded if any person does a particular act in the future, such a
contract shall create no obligation if such a person does anything by
which he or she becomes unable or it becomes impossible for him
or her to do such an act.
If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
any uncertain event does not happen in the future, the obligation
under such a contract shall arise only after such an event becomes
impossible to happen.
If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
any event happens within any fixed time in the future, the contract
shall be deemed to be void after such an event becomes impossible
to happen within, or after the expiry of, the fixed time.
If a contract is concluded to do or not to do any act if
any event does not happen within any fixed time in the future, the
obligation under such a contract shall arise if such an event does not
happen or it becomes certain that such an event will not happen
within the fixed time.
514. Application of general provisions of contract: The provisions
contained in this Chapter and Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Part shall,
generally, be applicable, to the other contracts to be concluded
according to this Act or law.
515. Interpretation of contract: (1) A contract shall be interpreted
according to the common intention of its parties.
If the intention cannot be established pursuant to subsection (1), a contract shall be interpreted according to the meaning
of general understanding that a reasonable person of the same
prudence as a party to the contract would give to it in normal
circumstances.
If one party to a contract knows or is deemed to know
a statement and conduct of the other party, the contract shall be
interpreted according to the intention of such a party.
The terms and expressions used in a contract shall be
interpreted in the light of the entire contract or the context in which
such terms and expressions are used.
A contract shall be interpreted in a manner so that all
the terms used in the contract are given effect without separating
some terms from others.
516. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may file a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-3
Validity of Contracts
517. Void contracts: (1) A contract which is not valid according to law
shall be deemed to be a void contract.
The following contracts shall be void:
A contract that restraints anyone from exercising
any profession, trade or business which is not
prohibited by law,
Provided that a contract shall not be
deemed to be made in restraint of any profession,
trade or business in any of the following
circumstances:
Where a contract is concluded between a
buyer and a seller on the sale and purchase
of the goodwill of any trade or business,
the contract restraining the seller from
carrying on similar trade or business under
such goodwill for the time and at the place
specified in such contract,
A contract concluded between the partners
to restrain them from doing the same
profession, trade or business as that of the
partnership firm or any other profession,
trade or business together with other
persons who are competitors of the
profession, trade or business of the same
nature other than the profession, trade or
business of the partnership firm until the
partnership exists,
A contract concluded between the partners
restraining
exercising
profession, trade or business of the
partnership firm for a certain reasonable
period or at a certain place after being
separated from the partnership,
A contract so concluded between a person
and any person, firm, company or body
person
restrained
accepting the service of another person,
firm, company or body who is the
competitor of such other person, firm,
company or body until the person is in the
service of, or for a specified period after
retirement from the service of, such other
person, firm, company or body.
A contract in restraint of a marriage other than
one prohibited by the law,
A contract restraining any one from enjoying the
facilities being enjoyed by the public,
A contract restraining legal right of any person
from being enforced by a court,
A contract concluded contrary to law or on a
matter prohibited by the law in force,
A contract made for an immoral purpose or
against public order or public interest,
A contract which cannot be performed because
the parties thereto do not exactly ascertain or
know about the matter in relation to which it has
been concluded,
A contract the performance of which is
impossible at the time of its conclusion or a
fictitious contract,
A contract which is vague because of its subject
matter being incapable of giving a reasonable
meaning,
A contract concluded by a person not competent
to make contract,
A contract with an illegal purpose,
A contract concluded by mistake of both parties
as to the essential fact of the contract at the time
of its conclusion.
A void contract is invalid ab initio and it shall create
neither any legal consequence nor any right and obligation of its
parties.
Even if any part of a contract becomes void, its
remaining parts shall be enforceable according to law.
518. Voidable contracts: (1) A contract which, at the initiation of its
party, may be declared void by the court shall be deemed to be a
voidable contract.
The person aggrieved from any of the following
contracts may get the contract voided by the court:
A contract concluded by coercion,
Explanation: If a person detains or threatens to detain
any property of another person or threatens to put that
other person's body, life or prestige in peril or commits
or threatens to commit any other act forbidden by law,
with the intention of causing that other person to enter
into a contract against his or her will, the person is said
to commit coercion.
A contract concluded by undue influence,
Explanation:
Undue influence means an influence exercised
by a person over another person who is under his
or her influence or who may be employed
according to his or her will with the intention of
taking any unfair advantage for his or her
interest or concern.
Without prejudice to the generality of clause (1),
the following person is deemed to be under
influence or who may be employed according to
his or will:
A person who is under his or her
guardianship, curatorship or custody,
A person who is incapable of representing
his or her interest for the time being or
forever by reason of age, illness or
physical or mental distress,
A person who may be subjected to
financial or positional influence of that
other person.
A contract concluded by fraud,
Explanation: A party to a contract or his or her agent
is said to commit fraud when he or she, with intent to
deceive another party thereto or his or her agent, makes
the suggestion, as to a fact, of that which is not true
which he or she does not believe it to be true or does
any act that is likely to make the other party or his or
her agent believe it, or knowingly conceals a fact
which is in his or her knowledge or does any such act
as the law declares to be fraudulent.
A contract caused by misrepresentation.
Explanation: Misrepresentation means any of the
following acts:
Presenting a false description of any matter or
fact on without reasonable basis,
Misleading any party to his or her detriment,
Causing a mistake as to any matter of the
contract,
Making assurance to have concluded a contract
in one subject and but causing to enter into it in
another subject.
In the case of a voidable contract under this Section,
the following matters shall be governed as follows:
The party caused to enter into a contract may, instead
of having the contract voided, demand that his or her
position be restored into the position that would have
been had the contract not been concluded.
If a contract is made with the person who is under his
or her influence and whose will can be dominated by
him or her, the party who claims that he or she has not
exercised such undue influence shall have the onus to
prove that the contract has not been caused by undue
influence.
A voidable contract shall, before it is voided, be
enforceable as if it were a lawful contract.
If a voidable contract under this Section is voided by
the court, it shall not affect the act done under such contract before
the voidance.
If any contract is voided pursuant to this Section, the
legal right or interest of a bona fide third party shall not be
prejudiced merely by the reason of such voidance.
519. Unenforceable contracts: (1) A contract that is not enforceable by
the court shall be regarded as an unenforceable contract.
Any of the following contracts is not enforceable by
the court in spite of its being concluded in fulfillment of the
procedures under Chapter-2 of this Part:
(a) A contract required to be made in written form
according to law is not concluded in written form,
A contract required to be made in fulfillment of any
particular formality or procedure or to be registered
with any body according to law is not so made in
fulfillment of such formality or procedure or is not so
registered,
Where a contract is concluded on behalf of another
person, the contract is concluded on a matter not
authorized by, or concluded beyond the authority given
by, that other person.
520. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit at any
time, in the case of a void contract, within one year after the date of
accrual of the cause of action for voidance, in the case of a voidable
contract, and within two years after the date of accrual of the cause
of action, in the case of other contracts.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Performance of Contracts
521. Obligation under contract to be fulfilled: Each party to a contract
shall fulfill his or her obligation under the contract.
522. Reciprocal performance of contract: (1) If a contract is so
concluded that the parties to the contract shall fulfill their respective
obligations simultaneously and one party demonstrates such
conduct or intention that he or she is not willing to fulfill his or her
obligation materially, the other party need not perform his or her
promise.
If the contract fixes the order of priority for the
fulfillment of any promise, the promise shall be fulfilled in that
order, and failing the fixation of such an order, the party who is
liable to perform the promise first according to the nature of the
contract shall perform it first.
If, in the case of a contract containing reciprocal
promises, and performance of one promise depends on the
performance of the other promise, one party cannot perform the
contract because of the failure of the other party to perform his or
her promise may recover the loss or damage caused by the failure of
the other party to perform the contract.
If a contract concluded for reciprocal promises to be
simultaneously performed pursuant to sub-section (1) and one party
prevents the other party from performing such a contract, the other
party so prevented is entitled to rescind the contract and also to
recover the loss or damage, if any, caused to him or her in
consequence of such termination of the contract.
523. Time and manner for performance of contract: (1) If a contract
specifies the time and manner for its performance, the contract shall
be performed within the specified time and in the specified manner.
If a contract does not specify the time or manner for
the performance of an act under the contract but the act can be
performed only at any specific time or only in a specific manner,
the contract shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the act
has to be performed at that time and in that manner.
If, except in the circumstance under sub-section (2), a
contract does not specify the time and manner for its performance,
the contract shall be performed within a reasonable time and in a
reasonable manner.
524. Place for performance of contract: (1) If a contract specifies any
particular place for the performance of any act, that act shall be
performed at such a place.
If, any party is required by a contract to hand over or
deliver any goods to the other party and the contract does not
specify the place for such hand-over or delivery of the goods, the
contract shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the goods
have to be delivered or handed over at the place where such goods
are located.
If a contract does not specify a particular place for the
performance of an act but the act can be performed only at a
particular place or has to be performed in any particular place
having regard to practice or usage or nature of the act, the contract
shall be deemed to have been so concluded that the act has to be
performed at that place.
In any case other than those referred to in sub-sections
(2) and (3), if a contract does not specify the place for the
performance of an act, the party performing the act according to the
contract shall notify the other party to specify a reasonable place for
the performance of the act, and the other party shall specify a
reasonable place for the performance of the act.
525. Performance of contract deemed to be delayed: (1) If a contract
so made as to be performed at a particular time is not performed at
or within such time, the performance of contract shall be deemed to
have been be delayed.
If the contract under sub-section (1) can be performed
even after such time, one party of the contract may notify the other
party to perform the contract, having given a reasonable time.
If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
other party shall perform the contract accordingly, and may claim
for compensation for any loss or damage caused in consequence of
the delayed performance of the contract.
If a contract is not performed pursuant to sub-section
(3), the party giving such a notice may rescind the contract.
526. Time to be considered as essence of contract: (1) If the the
purpose or objective of a contract cannot be achieved, in case of
non-performance of the contract within a particular day, time or
period, having regard to the nature of the contract or intention
shown by the parties at time of its conclusion, the time for the
performance of such a contract shall be considered to be the essence
of the contract.
If either party of a contract does not perform the
contract under sub-section (1) within such a day, time or period,
such a contract shall be deemed to have been breached and the other
party may rescind the contract immediately.
527. Circumstances where a contract needs not be performed: In any
of the following circumstances, it is not necessary to perform any
act under, or perform, a contract:
If either party to a contract waives the other party from
fulfilling the obligation under the contract,
If a voidable contract is voided by the party entitled to
do so,
If the contract cannot be performed for the reason of its
breach by the other party,
If it is not necessary to perform the act under the
contract by operation of any provision of this Part,
If a contract which is unenforceable according to

Section 531.
528. Assignment of rights and liabilities under a contract: If any
party to a contract dies or becomes insane, the rights accruing from
the contract shall devolve on to the heir succeeding the property of
such a party to the contract, and the heir himself or herself shall
also bear the obligations to the extent of the property succeeded by
him or her.
Provided that the rights and obligations accruing on the basis
of personal skill and qualification shall not devolve on to such an
heir.
529. Party who must perform contract: (1) Except in cases where a
contract specifies that it must be performed by its party only, the
contract may be performed by his or her agent or by a person
appointed by him or her or by any other person on his or her behalf
or the rights and obligations under the contract may be transferred.
Provided that no party to a contract may transfer his or her
obligations under the contract to another person without consent of
the other party.
The following terms and conditions shall be fulfilled in
order to transfer rights and obligations under a contract pursuant to
sub-section (1):
Unless the contract otherwise provides for, the
transfer shall be in written form,
The transfer shall be unconditional,
The transfer of rights or obligations is not
prohibited by law or the contract,
In the case of the transfer of rights and obligations,
a notice along with its time limit shall be given to
the other party.
Once any party to a contract accepts any act done by a
third person, that party shall not be entitled to claim subsequently
that the act must be done by the party to the contract himself or
herself, except as otherwise provided for in the contract.
If two or more persons jointly enter into a contract with
another party, any or all of such joint promisors shall fulfill, or
cause to be fulfilled, the obligations under the contract, except as
otherwise provided for in the contract.
The joint promisor who fulfills the obligation shall be
entitled to recover damages or loss on a pro rata basis from the
other joint promisors, in consideration for the default of any other
joint promisor in the fulfillment of the obligation under sub-section
Even if one party releases one joint promisor of the
other party to the contract concluded pursuant to in sub-section (4)
from the obligation on his or her part, such release shall not
discharge the other joint promisors from the obligation under that
contract.
530. Only the parties to contract can demand its performance: (1)
Only the person who is a party to a contract can demand the
performance of the contract by the other party.
Provided that if a contract is concluded for the benefit of any
person, such a person can demand the performance of that contract
even if he or she is not a party to such a contract.
If two or more persons jointly enter into contract to do
or not to do any act, all such a persons can jointly demand the
performance of that contract, except as otherwise provided for in
the contract.
531. Discharge of contracts in the event of fundamental changes in
circumstances: (1) If it becomes impossible to perform a contract
as a result of fundamental change in the circumstance existed at the
time of conclusion of the contract, the act according to the contract
need not be performed.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1),
emergence of any of the following circumstances shall be deemed
to constitute a fundamental change in the circumstance existed at
the time of conclusion of a contract:
If the contract becomes illegal and thereby it cannot be
performed,
If it becomes impossible to perform the contract due to
emergence of situations beyond human control such as
war, flood, landslide, fire, earthquake and volcanic
eruption,
If the subject matter essential for the performance of
the contract is destroyed or damaged, or exists no
longer, or such a subject matter could not be obtained,
If the contract is so concluded that its performance
depends on the personal ability, skill or talent of a
person, and the performance of the contract becomes
impossible by the reason that such a person dies or
becomes insane or is incapable of performing the
contract because of physical or mental disability.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
none of the following circumstances shall be deemed to constitute a
fundamental change in the circumstance existed at the time of
conclusion of a contract:
If the performance of the contract has become difficult,
If the performance of the contract results in less profit
or in loss,
If any party to the contract is dependent upon any third
party who is not a party to the contract for its
performance, and the third party makes a default or
becomes incompetent,
In the event of a strike or lockout,
If additional tax, fee or other revenue is required to be
paid,
If a contract is concluded with more than one object
and some of the objects cannot be fulfilled.
In the case of emergence of any of the circumstances
referred to in sub-section (3), the parties may, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, negotiate to review or alter the terms
and conditions of the contract.
If the performance of a contract becomes impossible by
the reason of a fundamental change in the circumstance as referred
to in sub-section (2), the following matters shall be governed as
follows:
A party who has received any amount paid by the other
party in consideration of the contract, prior to the
occurrence of such a change in the circumstance, shall
refund it to the other party,
Payment to be made or due from one party to the other
party in consideration of the contract shall not be
payable after such a change in the circumstance.
The amount payable to each other shall be determined
in consideration the act or amount already performed
or paid, if any, by one party to the other party before
such a change in the circumstance, and one party shall
be entitled to recover reasonable expenses incurred by
that party in consideration of the contract from the
other party.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the contracting parties may agree to fulfill their respective
obligations by continuing the performance of the contract after the
end of the circumstance under clause (b) of sub-section (2).
532. Facilities to be provided: (1) The parties to a contract shall
provide to each other such facilities as may be needed to perform
the contract from their respective sides.
If the contract cannot be performed due to the failure to
provide such facilities, the party in default of the performance shall
not be held liable responsible.
533. Contract may be suspended or altered: (1) The parties to a
contract may, if they so agree, change or alter all or any of the
portions of the act to be performed under the contract, extend the
time for the performance of any act under the contract, suspend the
contract by not making it obligatory to perform any act to be
performed under the contract for some time, substitute any act for
the act specified in the contract or make a new contract in
substitution for the original contract.
If any change or alteration is made to a contract
pursuant to sub-section (1), a new contract shall be deemed to be
made, and the new contract shall become effective accordingly.
If a new contract is made pursuant to sub-section (2),
the obligation under the original contract need not be borne except
as otherwise provided for in the new contract.
534. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Breach of Contract and Remedies
535. Breach of contract deemed to occur: (1) If any party to a contract
fails to fulfill the obligation under the contract or gives a notice to
the other party that he or she will not perform the act to be
performed by him or her under the contract or his or her action and
conduct demonstrate that he or she is incapable of performing the
act under the contract, the party shall be deemed to have breached
the contract.
If one party commits a breach of the contract pursuant
to sub-section (1) or action or conduct of that party demonstrates
non-performance of the contract in a material respect or
demonstrates a material breach of the contract by the conduct or
action of a party, the other party may rescind the contract by giving
a notice to such a party.
In the case of the rescission of the contract pursuant to
sub-section (2), the party rescinding the contract shall not be bound
to perform the contract.
536. Indivisible nature of the authority to rescind contract: If either
party of a contract consists of two or more persons, the contract
may be rescinded only if all of such persons rescind it or if the
rescission is applicable to all of them.
537. Compensation for breach of contract: (1) In the case of breach of
a contract under Section 535, the party aggrieved by it shall be
entitled to recover from the party in breach of the contract damages
for the actual loss or damage caused by the breach or such loss or
damage which the contracting parties knew when they made the
contract to be likely result from the breach.
If the parties to a contract, in anticipation, at the time
of its formation specify a sum in the contract, which becomes
payable for breach of the contract, the aggrieved party shall be
entitled to recover a reasonable amount not in excess of that sum
from the other party, pursuant to sub-section (1).
If the contract does not provide for compensation
referred to in sub-section (2), the party claiming such compensation
shall be entitled to recover a reasonable amount for the direct and
actual loss or damage resulted from the breach of contract or for the
breach of contract or for compensation.
Provided that no compensation may be recovered for any
indirect or remote loss or damage.
If a contract, which is concluded for the completion of
any act within a fixed period, contains a provision that
compensation as referred to in sub-section (2) is payable if such an
act cannot be completed within that period, the party paying such
compensation may request for the extension of the period for the
completion of the contract in proportion to the amount of
compensation paid by him or her.
The right of a party to a contract to seek other legal
remedies for the breach of a contract shall not be deemed adversely
affected merely by the reason that the amount of compensation has
been paid pursuant to this Section.
538. Consequences of rescission or voidance of contract: (1) If, after a
party to a contract has already received some cash or kind or any
other benefit from the other party or after the fulfillment of the
obligations under the contract partially, the contract is rescinded by
mutual consent of the parties and the performance of the contract is
not required under this Part or other law, the contract is voided or
declared to be void according to law or the contract becomes
invalid or is rescinded under this Part, such cash, kind or service so
received shall be returned upon having settled the accounts of the
cash or kind given until the date of the contract being in force.
If any service or advantage other than cash or kind has
been given pursuant to sub-section (1), the party receiving such
service or advantage shall pay a reasonable amount to the other
party in consideration for such service or benefit.
If it becomes necessary to institute legal action by the
reason of failure to return the cash or kind or to pay the amount as
referred to in sub-section (1), a reasonable expense incurred for that
purpose may also be recovered.
539. Amount to be recovered in proportion to performed contract
(quantum meruit): If a contract is rescinded by the reason of its
breach by any party or for any other reason, the aggrieved party
may claim for the payment by the other party of amount under the
contract in proportion to the work done or the performance of
contract made by that party.
540. Specific performance of contract: (1) If monetary compensation
is not reasonable and adequate for the actual loss or damage
suffered by the aggrieved party because of the breach of contract,
the aggrieved party may claim for the specific performance of the
contract instead of compensation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
specific performance may not be claimed in any of the following
circumstances:
If monetary compensation is an adequate remedy
for the breach of contract,
If the court cannot supervise the performance of the
act under the contract,
If the contract is for providing services of personal
ability, skill or knowledge,
If the contract cannot specifically be performed,
If the party in breach of the contract claims for its
specific performance.
541. Power of court to make order: (1) If the performance of a contract
is not possible because any party to the contract is about to perform
any act or conduct which is contrary to the nature of the contract,
the party aggrieved by such an action or a conduct may file a
complaint in the court to prevent such an act or conduct.
If a complaint is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court may issue an appropriate order to any party to immediately
stop his or her particular action or conduct, subject to the settlement
of the dispute arising out of that contract in accordance with such a
contract or law.
If an order is issued pursuant to sub-section (1), the
aggrieved party shall be entitled to also recover additional loss or
damage caused from the failure of the other party to comply with
the order so issued.
542. Compensation to be ascertained in monetary value: Except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, assessment of compensation
for any loss or damage as referred to in this Chapter shall be
ascertained in monetary value.
Provided that Section 540 shall apply to the remedy under
that Section.
543. Power of court to consider matters: While determining
compensation arising from the breach of a contract, the court shall
consider matters including whether the party has breached the
contract intentionally or whether the non-performance has occurred
due to recklessness and how much money or benefit might have
been received by the innocent party to the contract had the contract
not been breached.
544. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from an act done
or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Contract of Sale of Goods
545. Contract of sale of goods: (1) A contract of sale of goods shall be
deemed to have been made if any seller agrees to transfer the
property in goods immediately or in the future to the buyer for a
price.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“goods” means any kind of movable property capable of being
purchased or sold other than currency in circulation for the time
being, security or actionable claim.
A contract of sale of goods may be conditional or
unconditional.
A contract may be concluded to sell the goods owned
or possessed by the seller for the time being or those to be produced
or acquired by the seller in the future.
546. Contract of sale of goods to be void: If a contract is concluded to
sell any specific type of goods, which have already become
damaged at the time of or before making of the contract, and the
seller is not aware about that at the time of making of the contract,
the contract shall be void.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“specific type of goods” means the specific goods mentioned in the
contract at the time of making of the contract.
547. Determining price of goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for
in the contract, the price of goods shall be determined in the manner
agreed upon in the contract under the terms and conditions of the
contract, or by the course of dealing between the parties.
If the price of goods is determined according to their
weight and measurement, the price of goods shall be determined on
the basis of the net weight and measurement of such goods, except
as otherwise provided for in the contract.
If the price of goods cannot be determined under subsection (1) or (2), the buyer shall pay the seller a reasonable price,
taking into account the relevant circumstances.
548. Payment of price of goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the contract, the price of goods shall be paid as follows in any of
the following circumstances:
The price of goods to be paid by the buyer to the
seller, at the time of the purchase of goods by the
buyer,
At the time of the transfer of the goods.
While making payment of the price of goods pursuant
to sub-section (1), it shall be paid in cash.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“cash” includes a cheque, traveler's cheque, promissory note, bill of
exchange, letter of credit, bank draft, credit card and telegraphic
transfer, payable through bank.
549. Description of goods: (1) If a contract specifies the name, brand,
trademark or specification of any goods to be sold, the contract
shall be deemed to have been concluded for the sale of the goods
corresponding to that name, brand, trademark or specification.
If a contract specifies the name, brand, trademark or
specification and the sample of goods to be sold, the bulk of such
goods shall correspond not only to the sample but also to the name,
brand, trademark or specification specified in the contract.
550. Condition as to title to goods to be sold: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, it shall be deemed that, in the case of a
sale of goods, the seller has the title to the goods sold or, in the case
of an agreement to sell the goods in the future, the seller has or will
have the title to the goods to be sold, and that such goods are free
from custody, control or possession by any other person.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
seller shall be deemed to have the right to sell the goods sold or to
be sold.
551. Condition as to quality of goods:(1) Except as otherwise provided
for in the contract, the goods sold or to be sold shall be deemed to
be of satisfactory quality.
If any goods sold or to be sold for any particular
purpose are fit for that purpose, the goods sold or to be sold shall be
considered to be of satisfactory quality.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if the contract itself specifies any defects of such goods or if the
buyer has already knew such defects before the conclusion of the
contract or while inspecting the goods, such goods shall not be
deemed to be of unsatisfactory quality.
If the quality of any particular goods is specified in the
contract, the goods shall correspond to that quality, and if no
quality is so specified, the goods shall be of the quality according to
the prevalent standards.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
seller shall not be deemed to have warranted that the goods sold or
to be sold are of a particular quality.
552. Right to accept or reject goods of different quantity: (1) If the
seller tenders to deliver to the buyer the goods of different quality
than that specified in the contract, the buyer has the right to accept
and take delivery of the goods in whole, to reject the whole or to
accept any part and reject the rest of the goods.
If any goods are rejected in whole or in part pursuant to
sub-section (1), the buyer may give a notice to the seller to either
deliver other goods instead of such goods or where the quality of
such goods could be improved, to improve the quality of such
goods.
If a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (2), the
seller shall deliver the other goods instead of such goods or improve
the quality thereof, according to the notice given by the buyer or
mutual understanding reached between them.
553. Deemed to be contract for sale by sample: (1) If a provision has
been made in a contract to sell goods upon inspection of their
samples directly or indirectly a contract of sale of goods is deemed
to be a contract for the sale of goods upon inspecting sample.
If a contract is concluded for the sale of goods by
sample, the contract shall be deemed to contain the following
conditions, except as otherwise provided for in the contract:
The bulk of the goods shall correspond to the
sample in quality,
The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of
comparing the quality of the bulk of the goods
with the sample,
The goods sold or to be sold shall be free from
any defect, and such goods appear to be of
satisfactory quality, apparent on comparing them
with the sample.
554. Provisions relating to transfer of ownership of goods: (1) If there
is a contract for the sale of any specific or certain goods, the
transfer of such goods shall be made as provided for in the contract,
and failing such provision in the contract, the transfer shall be made
according to the terms and conditions of the contract, intention of
the parties, ascertained by having regard the conduct of the parties,
and the relevant circumstances.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if a
contract is concluded for the sale of any specific goods in a
deliverable state, the parties shall be deemed to have the intention
of transferring them when the contract is concluded or upon
payment of the price of the goods.
If a contract is concluded for the sale of any specific
goods in a deliverable state and the buyer has to take measurement,
weight, make examination of the goods or to perform some acts to
determine the price of such goods, such goods shall not be
transferred until the buyer performs such acts and gives information
thereof to the buyer within a reasonable time.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, a
contract shall be deemed to have been concluded so that the goods
sold or to be sold shall be transferred in the place where such goods
are situated.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
buyer shall be deemed to have the title or ownership of the goods at
the time of the transfer of the goods to the buyer.
555. To bear risks: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the contract,
the seller shall bear the risk of any loss or damage to the goods until
such goods are transferred to the buyer.
If the transfer of goods has been delayed due to the
fault of either the buyer or the seller, the party who has caused such
delay shall bear the risk of loss or damage under sub-section (1).
If the seller agrees to deliver the goods from the place
of purchase to the place specified by the buyer, the seller shall bear
the risk of any loss or damage to the goods, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract.
556. Right of buyer to ascertain goods: If the delivery of the goods
sold is tendered to the buyer, the buyer shall have a reasonable
opportunity to examine and ascertain whether or not the goods
conform to the contract and the buyer shall not be deemed to have
been accepted the delivery of the goods until the buyer so ascertains.
557. Goods deemed to be accepted: The buyer shall be deemed to have
accepted the goods in any of the following circumstances:
If the buyer or his or her agent receives the goods,
If a receipt or slip is issued having acknowledged the
delivery of the goods,
If the buyer stores the goods having ascertained,
pursuant to Section 556, that the goods conform to the
contract,
If the goods reach the buyer and the buyer does not
inform the seller within reasonable time that he or she
has rejected the goods and retains the goods with him
or her.
If the buyer does any act proving that he or she has
ownership in and control over such goods.
558. Time for delivery of goods: (1) If the contract provides that goods
have to be delivered at any specific time or within any specified
period, the seller shall deliver the goods to the buyer at that time or
within that period.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the buyer accepts the goods delivered by the seller before or after
the time or period specified in the contract, the seller shall be
deemed to have delivered the goods.
559. Documents concerning sold goods to be handed over: Except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, the goods are delivered but
such basic documents as are related to the ownership of the goods
or required for their use are not handed over, the ownership of the
goods shall not be deemed to have been transferred.
560. Not to deliver of goods in quantity different from quantity
specified in contract: (1) If the seller delivers to the buyer a
quantity of goods less than the quantity specified in the contract, the
buyer may reject the goods.
Provided that if the buyer accepts the goods even in such
quantity, the buyer shall pay the price of that quantity at the rate
specified in the contract.
If the seller delivers to the buyer a quantity of goods
larger than the quantity specified in the contract, the buyer may
accept the goods only in the quantity specified in the contract, and
reject the rest or the whole quantity of goods.
Provided that if the buyer accepts the whole quantity of
goods so delivered, the buyer shall pay for the whole at the rate
specified in the contract.
If the seller delivers to the buyer the goods mixed with
goods of a description different than specified in the contract, the
buyer may accept the goods specified in the contract and reject the
rest or the goods in whole.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
buyer shall not be bound to accept the delivery of goods in
installments.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if the
buyer rejects the goods tendered by the seller for delivery, the buyer
shall not be bound to return them to the seller.
Provided that the buyer shall give a notice of rejection, along
with the reason for the same, to the seller through fastest means of
communication.
561. Special provisions relating to compensation: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Part, the following provisions
shall apply to compensation for a contract under this Chapter:
If the buyer does not accept or rejects the goods or
refuses to pay the price of the goods after the making
of a contract of the sale of goods, the seller may,
subject to the contract, claim compensation from the
buyer in consideration of the buyer's failure to accept
or refusal to accept the goods,
While determining compensation under clause (a), if
the goods which the buyer has not accepted or has
refused to accept are available in the market,
compensation shall be determined on the basis of the
difference between the price of the goods specified in
the contract and the market or prevalent price of the
goods,
If the seller does not deliver or refuses to deliver the
goods according to the contract for the sale of goods,
the buyer may claim compensation from the seller for
his or her failure to deliver the goods,
While determining compensation under clause (c), if
the goods which the seller has refused or failed to
deliver to the buyer are available in the market,
compensation shall be determined on the basis of
difference between the price of the goods specified in
the contract and the market or prevalent price of the
goods.
562. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Guarantee
563. Contract of guarantee deemed to be made: (1) If a contract is
concluded under which a third party undertakes to repay the loan
borrowed by or discharge the liability promised by a person in case
of that person's default, a contract of guarantee shall be deemed to
be concluded.
If a third party gives the guarantee pursuant to subsection (1) and the person bound to repay the loan or discharge the
liability fails to repay or discharge such loan or liability, the person
giving the guarantee (the surety) to such loan or liability shall repay
the loan or discharge the liability according to the terms and
conditions of the contract.
The terms and conditions of guarantee shall be as
determined in the contract.
A contract of guarantee shall be made in written form.
564. Surety's obligation: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the
contract, the surety's obligation shall be as follows:
Obligation of the surety shall arise at the time when the
debtor fails to discharge the obligation to be discharged
by him or her.
Obligation of the surety shall be the same as the
obligation of the debtor who has to repay the loan or
discharge the obligation, and the surety shall remain
liable until the debtor becomes free from the obligation
to repay or discharge.
Obligation of the surety shall not be discharged merely
because the principal debtor becomes free from the
obligation by operation of law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if both security and guarantee have been given for any loan or
obligation, the surety shall not be liable to the extent covered by the
security so provided.
A contract of guarantee shall be effective immediately
when the principal debtor breaches the obligation of repayment or
discharging liability to the creditor, and the creditor may cause the
surety to discharge such liability.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Part, the term
“creditor” means a person who has lent a loan, and also includes a
person who is entitled to obtain any benefit from, or have any act
done, by the person who is bound to repay the loan or discharge the
liability.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
the creditor shall give a notice to the principal debtor to perform the
contract according to its terms and conditions before claiming the
surety under the contract of guarantee for the repayment of the
amount not paid or discharge of the liability not discharged
according to the contract.
565. When surety is in discharge from obligation: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, the surety shall be in
discharge of his or her obligation to the following extent, in any of
the following circumstances:
If the principal debtor so alters the terms and
conditions of the contract without the surety's consent
as to have substantial impact on the contract, in respect
of the transactions subsequent to the alteration,
If a contract is concluded to discharge the principal
debtor from the obligation for which the guarantee was
given,
If the principal debtor is discharged from the obligation
by an act or action of the creditor or the loan is written
If the creditor agrees to discharge the debtor from the
liability by recovering a sum less than that is due or to
give additional time for repaying the loan or not to
institute a lawsuit,
If any act or action by the creditor causes an adverse
impact to the surety's right to legal remedy against the
principal debtor,
If the creditor loses, damages any security obtained by
him or her from the principal debtor or returns it to the
principal debtor, to the extent of the value of such
security,
To the extent to which the principal debtor has repaid
the loan or discharged the obligation to the creditor
according to the contract.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the surety shall not be deemed to be in discharge of obligation,
except as otherwise provided in the contract, merely because the
creditor fails to institute legal action against the surety or attempt to
recover the amount to be recovered by him or her in time.
If there are two or more sureties and the creditor
discharges one co-surety from obligation, the other co-sureties shall
not be discharged from their respective part of obligation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if the part of the co-sureties' obligation cannot be separated, no cosurety shall be deemed to be in discharge of his or her obligation
even though the creditor has discharged him or her from the
obligation.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
surety shall not be in discharge of obligation under the contract of
guarantee merely because there arises a dispute between the parties
in relation to the contract creating the obligation for the discharge
of which the contract of guarantee is made.
566. Relation between the surety and the principal debtor: (1) The
surety shall cause the principal debtor to repay the loan or discharge
the obligation according to the contract.
If the principal debtor has given any property or
security to the surety for the guarantee given by him or her while
borrowing a loan or promising the obligation, the surety shall not
pledge, mortgage, sell or otherwise transfer the title to such
property or security without the consent of the principal debtor.
If a guarantee is given for any loan or obligation
borrowed or promised for any specific purpose, the object, nature or
terms and conditions of that loan or obligation shall not be altered
without the consent of the surety.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the contract otherwise provides in relation to the surety
and the principal debtor, such provision shall be applicable.
567. Surety to substitute creditor: (1) After the surety has, on behalf of
the principal debtor, repaid the loan to be repaid or discharged the
obligation to be discharged to the creditor under the contract, the
surety shall substitute the creditor in relation to such loan or
obligation, and, as the creditor, be entitled to recover the loan from,
or institute legal action against, the principal debtor.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, the principal debtor shall pay to the surety the sum of loan
repaid by the surety or all amounts in consideration for the
obligation performed by the surety on behalf of the principal debtor,
as well as interest or any other fee or amount chargeable thereon.
If it becomes necessary to institute legal action because
of the default of the principal debtor to pay the amount payable by
him or her under sub-section (2) or if any other expenses need to be
incurred in this regard, the surety shall be entitled to recover also
such expenses from the principal debtor.
568. When contract of guarantee can be voided: In any of the
following circumstances, the surety may have the contract of
guarantee voided:
If the guarantee is obtained by the creditor or by any
other person with his or her consent by supplying
misleading or false notice or information to the surety
about the matter of the transaction for which the
guarantee is given,
If the matter of guarantee, property or fact is concealed
or not disclosed,
If the contract is concluded on the condition that a third
person will also become the surety but the third person
does not consent to give the guarantee.
569. Obligation of sureties to be equal: (1) If two or more persons give
the guarantee jointly or severally for any loan or obligation and the
principal debtor fails to repay the loan or discharge the obligation,
the co-sureties shall repay the loan or discharge the obligation or
perform the contract on an equal basis, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract.
If, while giving the guarantee jointly pursuant to subsection (1), the co-sureties guarantee different parts, every surety
shall be liable to pay or bear the obligation only to the extent of the
respective part guaranteed by him or her.
570. Continuous guarantee: (1) A guarantee which is so given as to
extend to a series of transactions shall be deemed to be a continuous
guarantee.
If the provision of a guarantee referred to in subsection (1) is made, the surety shall be liable to the extent of the
amount of guarantee that could not be recovered in the entire period
of the contract of guarantee irrespective of the number of
transactions made thereunder.
The surety may, by giving a notice to the creditor at
least three months in advance, revoke the continuous guarantee as
to the future transactions.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if the
surety dies, the continuous guarantee shall be deemed to be ipso
facto revoked.
571. Contract of indemnity deemed to be concluded: (1) If a contract
is concluded by which one party to the contract promises to save
the other from loss or damage caused to him or her by the conduct
of the promisor himself or herself or by the conduct of any other
person working under the direction of such a party or loss or
damage caused to such a party or third party by his or her conduct,
the contract shall deemed to be a contract of indemnity.
If a contract referred to in sub-section (1) is concluded,
the indemnity holder shall be entitled to recover as compensation
all or any of the following amounts, subject to that contract:
(a) The amount of indemnity specified in the contract,
(b) If any loss or damage is caused to a third person, the
amount to be paid to or borne therefor,
(c) All costs paid in any suit, if any, filed or defended by
him or her in connection with the contract of
indemnity,
(d) The costs involved in any suit compelled to be made
due to failure to pay the amounts referred to in clause
(a), (b) or (c).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if the other party or third party suffers any loss or damage due to
any act done by any person under the direction of such a party when
such an act is done knowingly or recklessly by that person, with the
intention of causing such loss or damage, such a person shall
personally be liable for such loss or damage.
572. Provisions relating to subrogation: (1) If any person concludes a
contract with another person against any possible loss or damage
that could be caused by a third person to his or her property, facility
or right enjoyed by him or her or benefit that could result from his
or her business, the person concluding such a contract shall be
liable for such loss or damage irrespective of the person causing
such loss or damage.
Provided that if a contract is concluded to recover such loss
or damage from any other person, it shall be recovered from such
other person.
The amount or compensation, if any, specified in the
contract for any loss or damage suffered pursuant to sub-section (1)
and a reasonable amount or compensation, failing such
specification, shall be paid, or caused to be paid, immediately to the
person affected by the loss or damage or to his or her successor if
he or she is dead.
If any loss or damage is suffered pursuant to subsection (1), the person paying the amount or compensation referred
to in sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have subrogated the person
who has sustained such loss or damage, and accordingly, the
subrogator shall be entitled to the recovery of the amount or
compensation for such loss or damage from the person causing such
loss or damage.
573. Rights of subrogator: The rights and obligation of the subrogator
shall be as specified in the contract, and, failing such specification,
shall be as follows:
All the rights, under the contract, of the person who
has sustained the loss or damage shall devolve on the
subrogator,
The subrogator under clause (a) may recover from the
person who has caused the loss or damage, or from the
party to a contract concluded in that respect, if any, the
amount or reasonable compensation paid by him or her
to the person who has suffered the loss or damage, as
well as the costs incurred in having recourse to legal
remedies, if any.
574. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may file a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Bailment
575. Contract of bailment: (1) If a person so delivers any goods to
another person that the goods shall be returned to him or her or
handed over or sold to any other person according his or her
direction, a contract of bailment shall be deemed to have been
concluded.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“goods” means any movable property and right in such property,
other than currency in circulation.
In concluding a contract pursuant to sub-section (1), a
deed shall be executed while bailing any property the price of
which exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees.
576. Bailment deemed to be completed: (1) The process of bailment
shall be deemed to be completed once the bailee takes the delivery
of the goods under bailment.
If any person or any one authorized by him or her has
already taken any goods in custody or possession, such goods shall
be deemed to have been held as bailment.
577. To disclose faults in goods bailed: (1) The bailor shall disclose to
the bailee any fault in the goods bailed of which the bailor is aware
and which interferes with the use of them or can cause any loss or
damage to the bailee or warrants separate provision or arrangement
for their protection.
If the bailor does not make such disclosure knowingly
as required to be made pursuant to sub-section (1), to the bailee the
bailor shall be liable for any loss or damage arising from such
goods or such non-disclosure.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if the goods are bailed for hire, the bailor shall be responsible for any
loss or damage resulted from any faults in such goods even if the
bailor was not aware of the existence of such faults in such goods.
578. Obligations of bailee: (1) The bailee shall, take care of
(herbichar) and protect the goods bailed to him or her in
accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the contract
and, reasonable care of goods, as his or her own in the absence of
such terms and conditions.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, if any
goods bailed are lost, stolen, damaged, depreciated, deteriorated or
destroyed because of a disaster in spite of the reasonable care and
protection pursuant to sub-section (1), the bailee shall not be liable
to return such goods.
Provided that if the goods are lost, stolen, damaged,
depreciated, deteriorated or destroyed because of recklessness or
mala fide intention of the bailee or of his or her failure to take care
of or protect the goods according to the terms and conditions of the
contract, the bailee shall be liable to return the goods or pay an
amount equivalent to the price thereof to the bailor.
If the bailee uses the bailed goods without
authorization to do so under, or in a manner contrary to the terms
and conditions of, the contract, the bailee shall pay compensation to
the bailor for any damage, loss, destruction or deterioration arising
to the goods from such use.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
bailee shall not mix the bailor's goods with his or her own goods.
Provided that if the bailee, with the consent of the bailor,
mixes the goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, both
parties shall have an interest, in proportion to their respective share,
in the mixture thus produced and income accrued therefrom.
If the bailee, without consent of the bailor, mixes the
goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so
mixed can be separated, the title of the property in goods shall
remain in the parties respectively, but the bailee shall be bound to
bear the expenses for separation and the damage, if any, arising to
the bailor from the mixture.
If the bailee, without consent of the bailor, mixes the
goods of the bailor with his or her own goods, and the goods so
mixed cannot be separated pursuant to sub-section (5), the bailor
shall have right in such goods.
579. To return bailed goods: (1) The bailee shall return the bailed
goods to the bailor after the expiry of the period specified at the
time of bailment of the goods or after the accomplishment of the
purpose for which the goods were bailed.
If the bailee does not return the goods within the period
specified for retuning them pursuant to sub-section (1) or within a
reasonable period according to the nature of the goods failing such
specified period or if the bailor refuses to take the goods back
within such a period and if the goods are lost, stolen, damaged,
destroyed or deteriorated or any loss or damage is caused to the
bailor due to such goods from that date, the respective party shall be
liable for the loss or damage arising from his or her own default.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, in the
case of bailment of the goods owned by more than one person, the
bailee may return the goods to any one of the joint owners, or to the
person assigned by them, and if the goods are so returned, the
goods shall be deemed to have been duly returned.
If the bailee does not hold the goods bailed to him or
her in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract, the
bailor may take back the goods at any time.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
goods increased or earned from the bailed goods, shall also belong
to the bailor.
580. Bailor to be liable for other's goods bailed: If the bailor bails any
goods in which he or she has no title, right or ownership to the
bailee and the bailee is compelled to bear any claim or loss or
damage to a third party from such bailment or bear any costs in
relation to the bailment, the bailor shall also be liable to pay such
costs.
581. Goods given for repair and maintenance to be returned: (1) If
any goods are delivered to a person for their repair, improvement or
renovation in any manner, the person shall repair, improve and
renovate those goods and return them to the concerned owner, upon
charging the costs or service charge for such repair, improvement or
renovation within the period specified in the contract. If the goods
are not so returned within the specified period or any additional loss
or damage is caused to the goods or the goods are so damaged as to
be unusable in the course of their repair, improvement or renovation,
that person shall be liable to pay the compensation specified in the
contract and, failing such provision, a reasonable compensation to
the concerned owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the person who repairs, improves or renovates the goods shall have
the right to retain them until the payment of the costs incurred in
the repair, improvement or renovation of such goods or the service
charge if paid, and if such costs or service fee are not paid within a
reasonable period, that person may recover the costs or service fee
by selling the goods.
582. Costs incurred in taking care of (herbichar) bailed goods:
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the bailor shall
bear the expenses incurred in the bailment of goods and in the care
or security of the bailed goods.
583. Contract of bailment to be void: If it is proved that any goods are
bailed with the intention of disentitling partition share, abstaining
from paying any payable government fee or amount payable to any
one or for any other illegal purpose, such a contract of bailment
shall be void.
584. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from an act done
or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Collateral or Deposit
585. Contract of pledge or deposit deemed to be made: (1) If a person
takes delivery of goods as security for payment of a debt lent to
another person, a contract of collateral is deemed to have been
concluded and if a person takes delivery of goods as a security for
the performance of a promise by another person, a contract of
deposit shall be deemed to have been concluded.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“goods” means any property and includes title to or an instrument
establishing title to that property.
A contract of collateral or deposit may be made
pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to the debt for the payment of
which security is taken and interest of the debt, and if a deposit is
taken as a security for the performance of a promise, other expenses
related to that promise and expenses incurred in the care of
(herchaha)collateraled or deposited goods.
586. To return goods collateraled or deposited: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, after the payment of the debt
for which the collater has been taken or after the performance of the
promise for which person deposit has been taken shall be returned
to the concerned.
If the collateral or deposit taken under sub-section (1)
is or may be divided into different parts, the collateral or deposit
may be returned to the extent covered by the respective portion of
the debt repaid or the promise performed.
587. Rights of the person who obtains collateral or deposit: (1) If a
debt has been taken having pledged any goods as a collateral for its
payment and makes a default in payment of the debt or interest of
the debt, if any, within the specified period, the person who has
taken the collateral may initiate the right to take legal action to
recover the debt in accordance with law, by selling or auctioning
the collateral so given at the prevailing market price or transfer the
ownership of such security in his or her name subject to law, if such
sale or auction cannot be made.
If the goods pledged as collateral are sold at a price
lesser than the amount recoverable by the person who has taken the
collateral from the borrower under sub-section (1), such a person
shall be entitled to recover the shortfall amount from the other
assets of the borrower, and the collateral is sold at a price higher
than the amount to be recovered, the excess amount shall be
returned to the borrower.
Notwithstanding anything containing in sub-sections
(1) and (2), the person who has given the goods as collateral may
take back his or her goods at any time by paying the debt and
interest thereon and other amounts, if any, due and payable prior to
the sale of the pledged goods or the transfer of ownership thereof.
Provided that the person who has given the collateral shall
also be liable to bear additional liability arising to the goods
pledged from his or her failure to pay the amount within the
specified period.
If a deposit is taken as a security for the performance
of a promise and the promise is not performed or completed within
the specified time, the goods pledged as deposit may be used for the
performance of the promise or the expenses incurred in such
performance may be recovered from such goods.
If the promise cannot be performed from the goods
pledged as deposit, such shortfall amount may be recovered from
the other assets of the borrower.
588. Consequences of pledge or deposit of goods by non-owner: (1) If
anyone borrows a debt or enters into a promise by pledging to the
creditor any goods in which the he or she has no right or ownership
or which has been obtained under a contract which is void under
this Part and the pledgee does not know that fact, the pledgee shall
have the right to demand the borrower giving such a collateral or
deposit to give collateral or deposit of the goods owned by him or
her equal to that amount, and if the he or she fails to give the
collateral or deposit so demanded, the pledgee shall have the right
to get the contract voided.
If any goods obtained under a void contract are
pledged as a collateral or deposit and the contract has already
become void before giving such collateral or deposit or the pledgee
had the knowledge that the goods pledged as the collateral or
deposit did not belong to the pledger, the pledgee shall have no
right in such goods and may recover the amount to be recovered by
him or her or have the promise performed from other goods
belonging to the pledger.
If the pledger has a partial or limited title to, or
ownership of, the goods pledged as the collateral or deposit, the
pledgee also shall have right and title to such goods to that extent
only.
589. Creditors to be on equal footing (pari pasu): (1) If a person has
borrowed debt from two or more creditors at a time or several times
by pledging any of his or her goods as a collateral and the goods so
pledged as the collateral are not sufficient to pay the debt of all the
creditors, except as otherwise provided for in the contract, all the
creditors who have taken the goods as collateral shall be deemed to
be in pari pasu in respect of the debt outstanding and shall have the
right to make a proportionate claim on the goods accordingly.
A contract entered into giving priority right in the
future to a creditor on the goods already pledged as collateral
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be void. If a creditor has already
recovered his or her debt from such a collateral before the contract
becomes void in spite of knowing that there are also other creditors
in respect of the security, such a creditor shall return the amount to
other creditors and recover his or her debt from other assets of the
pledger.
590. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Agency
591. Contract of agency deemed to be made: Any person may appoint
any other person as his or her agent to do any act on his or her
behalf, except on the matter of his or her personal ability, to
conduct business as his or her agent or carry on any transaction
with a third person on his or her behalf or to represent him or her to
such a person or to establish any type of legal relation with the
person appointing an agent (the principal) and a third person, and if
an agent is so appointed, a contract of agency shall be deemed to
have been concluded.
592. Recognition of transaction carried out by agent: (1) Whatever a
person can do on his or her own, the person may get the same done,
or cause to be done, through an agent, subject to the law.
Provided that no act may be done through an agent for which
one has to be present in person.
A contract concluded through an agent appointed
pursuant to Section 591 or act done by the agent shall be deemed to
have been carried out by the concerned person and the obligation
arising out of such an act shall be performed as if the contract were
concluded or act done by the principal.
Provided that if the agent has done any act beyond his or her
authority, the principal shall not be liable for such an act other than
that accepted by him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if, out of the acts done beyond authority, some acts are within his or
her authority and some are beyond it and the part done within his or
her authority can be separated, the principal shall be liable to the
extent of the acts done within authority.
593. Power to appoint sub-agent: (1) If it is necessary to appoint a subagent according to the nature of any trade, business or transaction
or a sub-agent may be appointed having regard to the provision of
the contract or usage of the contract of agency, the agent may,
except as otherwise provided for in the contract, appoint a subagent with the consent of the principal.
Provided that an agent who has been appointed on the
condition that he or she shall represent or do any act personally may
not appoint a sub-agent.
If a sub-agent is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the agent shall give information thereof to the principal, and the
rights and obligations of the sub-agent so appointed shall be the
same as that of the agent appointed by the principal.
If an agent appoints a sub-agent without the consent of
the principal, the principal shall not be liable for any act done or
action taken by the sub-agent.
The agent appointing the sub-agent shall be personally
liable for the acts referred to in sub-section (3).
594. matters to be complied with by agent: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, an agent shall comply with the
following matters:
To act subject to the terms and conditions of the
contract of agency and the directions given by the
principal,
In the absence of any terms and conditions in the
contract or any direction given by the principal, to do
the business of agency in good faith, with full diligence
and necessary care and skill, accordance to the nature
of the act and business assigned to him or her and the
laws and usages of the place of transaction,
Provided that if, at the time of the conclusion of
the contract, the principal was aware that the agent has
no efficiency or capacity in relation to any matter, the
agent shall not be liable for any loss or damage
resulting from such inefficiency or incapacity of him or
On the removal from an agent, not to do any act as
usual in the capacity of an agent on the same business.
To render or show the details of accounts and records
of the agency business to the principal at the time of
demand,
In the case of any obstruction, obstacle or difficulty
arising in the course of business of the agency, to
notify the principal as soon as possible and obtain
necessary directions, and the principal shall be liable
for any act done according to the direction so given.
If the principal suffers any loss or damage because of
the failure of the agent to perform his or her duties under clauses (a),
(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the agent shall personally bear such
loss or damage.
595. Agent to be responsible: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agent shall, in any of the following circumstances,
be personally liable for the transaction done by him or her on behalf
of the principal:
(a) If the agent concludes a contract with a third party in
relation to any transaction with provision for personal
responsibility,
(b) If any act is done for or on behalf of an undisclosed
principal and such a principal is not disclosed,
(c) If the principal cannot be sued for any reason,
(d) If the contract is concluded in his or her own name,
(e) If any act is done beyond the scope of the contract of
agency or authority,
(f) If any misrepresentation or fraud is committed in the
course of the transaction,
(g) If the agent is required to be liable personally
according to the nature of the trade,
(h) If the interest of the agent is also involved in the
transaction.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract
between the agent and a third person, nothing shall be deemed to
bar the making of any claim by the third person against the
principal merely by the reason that the agent is personally liable
pursuant to sub-section (1), and legal action may also be taken
against the principal for a sum not recovered from the agent.
For the purposes of taking a legal action against the
principal pursuant to sub-section (2), the statute of limitation shall
be deemed to commence from the date of the last payment made by
the agent.
596. Principal to be liable when leading to believe that act is done
with authority: (1) If the principal gives information to a third
party that he or she has given authority to another person to act on
his or her behalf or leads the third party to so believe, the principal
shall be liable for any act done by the agent on his or her behalf
unless the third party has come to know or has reasonable ground to
know that the authority has not been so given.
In the cases referred to in sub-section (1), the principal
may be liable even for the act done by the agent beyond the
authority if there is a reasonable ground for the third party to
believe that the agent has authority.
597. Termination of agency: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agency shall be deemed to be terminated ipso facto,
in any of the following circumstances:
If the agent voluntarily renounces the agency and
gives a notice thereof to the principal,
If the principal revokes the authority given to the
agency or the contract of agency or gives a notice to
the agent on the impossibility of performance of the
contract,
If the agent is appointed for any specific business
and that business is completed,
If the agent is appointed for a specific period and
that period expires,
If the principal or the agent dies or becomes of
unsound mind,
If the principal is declared to be insolvent,
If the matter for which the agent is appointed no
longer exists,
If an agent is appointed by a body corporate and
such a body is liquidated or dissolved.
The principal may revoke any or whole of the authority
given to the agent at any time before the agent exercises the
authority, and if the authority is so revoked, the principal shall
immediately give a notice thereof to the agent.
Provided that if the agent has already exercised some of such
authority, the authority shall not be deemed to have been revoked in
relation to the act already done in exercise of the authority
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the agent also has a share in the property connected with
the main business of the agency, the agent may not be removed in
such manner as to be prejudicial to such share.
598. Agent may not be removed: (1) Except as otherwise provided in
the contract, if an agent is appointed for any specific period or act,
the principal shall not remove the agent before the expiry of that
period or before the completion of that act, except for a reasonable
and sufficient reason.
An agent who is appointed without specifying any
certain period or act shall not be removed without giving a prior
notice along with an appropriate reason.
If the principal removes the agent in contravention of
sub-section (1) or (2), the principal shall pay a reasonable
compensation to the agent.
599. Renunciation
agency
agent
allowed:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
except as otherwise provided for in the contract, an agent appointed
for a specific period or act shall not renounce the agency before the
expiry of, or completion of, such period or act, except for a
reasonable and sufficient reason.
Any agent appointed without specifying any period or
act under sub-section (1) shall not renounce the agency without
giving a prior notice along with the reason for such renunciation to
the principal.
If any agent renounces the agency in contravention of
sub-section (1) or (2), the principal may claim a reasonable
compensation.
600. Removal of sub-agent together with agent: If an agent ceases to
exist under this Part, the sub-agent appointed by him or her shall
also be deemed to have, ipso facto, been removed.
601. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved form any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-11
Provisions Relating to Contracts for Carriage of Goods
602. Contract for carriage of goods deemed to be made: (1) If a
contract is concluded for the carriage of any goods from one place
to another, a contract for the carriage of goods shall be deemed to
have been concluded.
Except as otherwise provided for in the contract, a
receipt or bill to be issued by the carrier to the owner of goods at
the time of handing over the goods for carriage shall be recognized
as an evidence of the contract concluded between the carrier and the
owner of the goods.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“carrier” means a person operating a transport service other than air
or marine transport, or a person engaged in the business of such
transport, and also includes a person operating the business of
carriage through internal navigation transport, rope-way or animal
or any other means.
Provided that if any person employed by the owner of goods
on wage basis or his or her agent or a person working under his or
her supervision carries goods, such a person shall not be deemed to
be a carrier for the purposes of this Chapter.
603. Carrier’s obligations: (1) It shall be the obligation of the carrier to
carry the goods received from the owner of the goods for carriage
to the specified destination in proper condition.
If the goods received from the owner of the goods for
carriage are lost, destroyed, broken, defaced or damaged or the
goods do not reach to the specified destination in proper condition
in any other manner, the carrier shall be liable for that.
The carrier shall carry the goods within the time
specified in the contract, and within a reasonable time, if no period
for transporting the goods is specified in the contract, and deliver
the goods to the owner of the goods or his or her agent or a person
designated by him or her.
604. Carrier to be liable: (1) If more than one carrier or mode of
transport is involved in the carriage of any goods, except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, the carrier to whom the
owner of the goods has been handed over the goods shall be liable.
If any goods are stolen, lost, damaged or destroyed
prior to the carriage and delivery of such goods by the carrier to the
concerned person, the carrier shall be liable for that.
Provided that if the goods are stolen, lost, damaged or
destroyed due to a disaster or accident, the carrier shall not be liable
for that.
605. Right to sell goods without consent of owner: (1) If the carrier
fails to carry any goods to the destination within the specified time
due to a disaster or accident in the course of carriage of the goods
and such goods are perishable or their price or quality is susceptible
to decrease significantly, the carrier may sell such goods even
without the consent of the owner.
The carrier shall pay the amount so obtained from the
sale made pursuant to sub-section (1) to the owner.
606. Carrier’s liability to be limited: (1) Except where the owner of
goods or his or her agent has clearly declared at the time of
conclusion of the contract that the value of the goods to be carried
is more or except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
compensation for any loss or damage to the goods carried by the
carrier shall not exceed one hundred thousand rupees.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the carrier shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any gold,
silver, diamond, jewelry or articles made thereof, precious stone,
bill of exchange, security, document registered at office, certificate
issued by an academic and other institute, coin, bank note, postal
stamp, fish, meat, fresh fruits and vegetable, insecticide and toxic
material, inflammable material, petroleum product, precious fine art
work, idol, curio goods or glass or goods made of glass or highly
breakable or fragile goods, wildlife and domestic animal, handicraft
product, arms and ammunition, explosive, electronic equipment
(radio, television, computer, mobile or similar other good) and their
spare parts, machinery and such goods as specified by the law to be
declared by the owner before the carriage, except where the owner
or his or her agent has made explicit declaration at the time of the
conclusion of contract or at the time of handing over of the goods to
the carrier for carriage.
For the purpose of bearing the risks involved in the
carriage of goods under sub-section (2), the carrier may insure the
goods through the owner of the goods or his or her agent or insure
the goods by himself or herself having charged separate fee to the
owner or the carrier may make other necessary provisions for
preventing the risks.
607. To bear compensation: The carrier shall, for such loss, damage or
harm as caused to the goods declared at the time of the conclusion
of contract or at the time of handing over the goods to the carrier
for carriage under this Chapter or the goods not requiring
declaration, in the course of their carriage, be liable to pay to the
owner the compensation, if any, specified in the contract, to
reimburse for the goods carried with the consent of the owner if no
such compensation is specified in the contract or failing such
consent, the prevailing price of such goods, and failing the
determination of the price, a reasonable price and also a reasonable
compensation for the loss and damage caused to the owner of the
goods, subject to Chapter-5 of this Part.
608. Termination of carrier's liability: Except as otherwise provided
for in the contract, the carrier's liability shall be deemed to have
been terminated in any of the following circumstances:
If the carrier or his or her agent carries and hands over
the goods to the owner of the goods or his or her agent
or the person designated by him or her,
If the goods handed over to the carrier are taken back
by the owner of the goods or his or her agent prior to
the carriage thereof,
If the carrier or his or her agent returns the goods to the
owner of the goods or his or her agent specifying the
reason that the goods cannot be carried within the
specified time because of the circumstance referred to
in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 531.
609. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Contracts of Lease
610. A contract of lease deemed to be made: (1) If a contract is
concluded under which a person gives any goods in which he or she
has right and possession to another person for use and possession
and enjoy the benefits accrued therefrom in consideration for a rent
payable regularly for a certain period, a contract of lease shall be
deemed to be concluded.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“goods" means any property from which benefit may be acquired
through consumption, possession or use without diminishing them.
If a contract of lease is concluded pursuant to subsection (1), except as otherwise provided for in the contract, the
lessor shall ensure the lessee of the following matters:
To transfer certain goods for use and possession
according to the contract,
To maintain the goods transferred pursuant to clause
(a) in a running condition so that they may be
possessed or used at the time of the transfer,
To make arrangements so that the goods transferred
pursuant to clause (a) or (b) can be possessed or used
peacefully and without any hindrance.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, any goods destroyable in use or consumable goods may not
be leased.
611. Form of the leased goods not to be changed: The lessee shall not
change the original form of the leased goods without the consent of
the owner during the period of the contract of lease.
Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall prevent
the repairing, maintaining, improving or renovating of the leased
goods.
612. To use the leased goods in good faith: (1) The lessee shall have
the right to possess and use the leased goods in good faith and in a
prudential manner as if the goods were owned by himself or herself.
While possessing and using the leased goods pursuant
to sub-section (1), the lessee shall possess and use them in
consonance with the object of the contract of lease.
If the lessee is proved to have possessed and used the
leased goods contrary to sub-section (1) or (2), the lessor may
terminate such a contract at any time.
613. To repair and maintain leased goods: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in the contract of lease, the lessor shall repair and
maintain the leased goods.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the possession or use of the leased goods cannot be made without
their immediate repair, maintenance or renovation, the lessee
himself or herself may repair, maintain or renovate such goods by
giving information thereof to the lessor.
The lessor shall reimburse or adjust in lease rent the
expenses incurred in the repair, maintenance or renovation made
pursuant to sub-section (2).
614. Lessor to be informed if goods are not usable: (1) If the leased
goods or any part thereof are lost, damaged or destroyed in any
manner, are not capable of being possessed or used for any reason,
any person makes a claim or dispute of any kind in relation to such
goods or any part thereof or any person creates hindrance or
disturbance in any manner while possessing or using the goods, the
lessee shall give information thereof to the lessor immediately.
Upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section (1),
the lessor shall carry out such repair, maintenance or renovation or
obtain such legal remedies as may be necessary to restore the goods
into their original condition according to the nature of the goods
within fifteen days.
In the case of failure to restore the leased goods into
their original condition within the period referred to in sub-section
(2), the lease rent shall be subject to reduction in proportion to the
extent to which such goods have been lost, damaged or destroyed or
become incapable of being used or possessed or such claim,
hindrance or dispute has been made.
615. Lessee to be liable: (1) The lessee shall possess or use the leased
goods by taking adequate safety measures having regard to the
nature of the goods in order to save the leased goods from loss or
damage.
If the leased goods are lost or destroyed for any reason
or the price of the goods decreases due to loss or destruction thereof
in any manner or due to loss because of negligence on the part of
the lessee, any member of his or her family, his or her agent or the
third party, during the validity of the contract of lease, the lessee
shall be liable therefor, and the lessee shall restore such goods into
their original condition, and if the lessee fails to do so, he or she
shall be liable to pay compensation therefor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), the lessee shall not be liable for the loss or damage, if any,
caused to the leased goods due to any force majeure event.
If partial loss or damage is caused to the leased goods
due to a force majeure event pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
lessor does not restore such goods into their original condition or
such restoration is not possible, the lessor shall reduce the lease rent
in proportion to the loss or damage.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"force majeure event" means any of the following events:
A storm, earthquake, eruption of volcano,
Excessive rain, flood, landslide, soil erosion,
thunder-storm,
Fire caused in any manner other than that caused
by dishonesty, negligence or recklessness on the
part of the lessee or his or her family member,
employee, worker or third party,
Act of terrorism, civil riot, civil war,
Other natural calamity of similar nature beyond
human control.
616. To pay lease rent: (1) The lessee shall pay to the lessor the lease
rent according to the terms and conditions of the contract of lease.
If the terms and conditions of payment of the lease rent
are not specified in the contract pursuant to sub-section (1), the
lessee shall pay the lease rent on the next day of the end of each
month, in the case of a movable property, within fifteen days of the
end of every fiscal year, in the case of farmland, servitude, land
leased for industrial or infrastructure building or housing, and
within a week of the end of every month, in the case of other goods.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any person does not let the lessee fully possess and use
such goods or any part thereof by showing any defect in the
ownership and possession of the leased goods or any part thereof,
creating any type of hindrance or obstruction or making a claim in
relation thereto, the lessee may reduce the lease rent in proportion
thereto.
617. Validity period of contract of lease: (1) No contract of lease
concluded in relation to the following goods shall remain valid for
more than the following period:
Thirty-five years in the case of housing land
leased for the construction of a building or
housing land in use after construction of a
building therein,
Thirty-five years in the case of the land leased for
the purpose of servitude,
Forty years in the case of the land leased for the
purpose
construction,
development
operation of the infrastructures such as industrial
structure, roads, canals, electricity generation,
Twenty years in the case of land for farming;
Nineteen years in the case of house and land
leased for the purposes other than that referred to
in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d),
Fifteen years in the case of a motor vehicle,
Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment
other than a motor vehicle,
Fifteen years in the case of machinery equipment
other than that referred to in clause (f) or (g),
Ten years in the case of a domestic animal,
Ten years in the case of goods other than that set
forth in this Section having regard to their life and
nature.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the parties may extend the validity period of the contract of lease,
subject to the validity period of the contract, before expiry of the
period referred to in such a sub-section.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the parties to a contract of lease may decide whether to extend the
period of the contract of lease having regard to the place where the
leased house and land are situated and the nature of the goods.
618. Leased goods may be sub-leased: (1) The lessee may, with the
prior consent of the lessor, sub-lease to any person the goods or any
part thereof leased under the contract of lease, by concluding
another contract of lease to that effect.
The lessee shall not be free from his or her obligation
towards the lessor for the reason that he or she has made a sub-lease
pursuant to sub-section (1).
The terms and conditions of such a sub-lease contract
concluded pursuant to sub-section (1) in relation to the goods on
sub-lease shall not be different than the terms and conditions of the
first contract of lease.
While determining the terms and conditions of the
contract of lease pursuant to sub-section (3), provision may be so
made that the sub-lessee shall be directly liable to the lessor in
respect of the leased goods, and if such provision is made, the sublessee shall be liable to the lessor to the extent of the sub-lease
contract.
The validity period of the contract of lease made
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the validity period of
the contract of lease concluded between the lessor and the lessee.
If the lessor makes recourse to any legal remedy or a
claim against the lessee under this Chapter, the sub-lessee shall not
be liable therefor except in the case referred to in sub-section (4).
Nothing shall be deemed to have been prejudiced in
any manner the right which the lessor may exercise under the
contract of lease based on anything contained in this Section,.
619. To return leased goods: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the contract of lease, if the contract of lease is terminated for any
reason, the lessee shall return the goods leased under this Chapter to
the lessor within thirty-five days of the termination of the contract
of lease.
Provided that, in the case of an immovable property, the
lessor shall be deemed to be entitled, ipso facto, to possess that
goods after thirty-five days of the termination of the contract of
lease.
The lessee shall return the goods leased pursuant to
sub-section (1) to the lessor on the same condition as they were
received at the time of lease.
Provided that the lessee shall not be liable for any natural
decay or depreciation caused from the possession and use of the
goods.
If a record of the goods or accessories and spare parts
thereof has been maintained at the time of leasing the goods, the
goods and accessories and spare parts thereof according to such
record shall also be returned, while returning the leased goods
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2).
Provided that the accessories or spare parts that get lost or
destroyed in the course of possession and use according to the
nature of the goods need not be returned.
620. Special provision relating to the contract of lease of immovable
property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, a contract of lease of any immovable property shall be
concluded in writing.
While leasing any immovable property for a period of
more than ten years, the contract of lease, setting out such matter,
shall be registered in a body legally authorized for that purpose.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, no immovable property can, without consent of the
Government of Nepal, be leased to a person who cannot acquire
ownership in any immovable property in Nepal according to law,
for the purpose of farming, constructing a building or housing and
land development.
In returning any building, shed or other structure built
by the lessee, or the garden, forest or trees located, in the land
leased under the contract of lease to the lessor upon the expiry of
the validity period of the contract of lease, except as otherwise
provided for in the contract, the lessee shall be deemed to have right
and ownership in such building, shed or other structure or garden,
forest or trees located therein, and the lessee shall accordingly
remove such building, shed, structure, garden, forest or trees from
such land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
if the lessor desires to take such building, shed or other structure or
garden, forest or trees located in such land on the as is where is
basis, the lessor shall pay the mutually agreed price for the same.
621. Contract of lease may be terminated: (1) The lessor may
terminate the contract of lease in any of the following
circumstances:
(a) Except as otherwise permitted by the lessor, if the
lessee fails to pay the lease amount until ninety days
after the due date for the payment of the lease rent
has expired,
(b) If the lessee possesses or uses the leased goods taken
contrary to Section 612,
(c) If the lessee fails to give information to the lessor or
keep him or her informed about the matters referred
to in sub-section (1) of Section 614,
(d) If the lessee fails to restore the leased goods into their
original condition having regard to the nature of the
goods pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 615,
(e) If the goods leased are sub-leased without the prior
consent of the lessor.
The lessee may terminate the contract of lease in any
of following circumstances:
If the leased goods cannot be possessed or used for the
purpose or object for which the goods have been leased,
If the lessor fails to reimburse the repair and
maintenance costs or make its adjustment to the lease
rent pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 613,
If the lessor does not reduce or agree to reduce the
lease rent amount pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section
614 or sub-section (4) of Section 615.
622. Provisions relating to house rent to apply: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in matters concerning
house rent the provisions of Chapter-9 of Part 4 shall apply.
623. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of the accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Hire-Purchase Contracts
624. Hire-purchase contract deemed to be made: (1) If a person lets
any goods to another person for hire on the following terms and
conditions, a hire-purchase contract shall be deemed to be
concluded:
The hirer has the right of possession and use of
the goods let by the owner of the goods, on the
condition of payment of the rent amount by
installments in periodic basis for that goods,
The hirer has the right to purchase the goods on
hire according to the terms and conditions of the
contract,
The ownership of such goods would be
transferred to the hirer upon payment of the last
installment,
The hirer may terminate the contract at any time
prior to the transfer of ownership pursuant to
clause (c).
The contract referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
concluded in writing.
The owner of the goods shall provide one copy of the
contract concluded pursuant to this Section to the hirer free of cost
as soon as the contract is so concluded.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"Goods" means any movable property that may be let
for hire for the purpose of its possession and use.
"Hirer” means a person who takes any goods on hire
for possession and use according to the hire-purchase
contract and also includes his or her successor in the
event of his or her death or other third person to
receive such goods under the contract.
625. Matters to be specified in hire-purchase contract: (1) The
following matters shall be specified in the hire-purchase contract
referred to in Section 624:
The goods and short description thereof,
Hire-purchase price of the goods,
Cash price of the goods,
The date of commencement of the contract,
The amount of installment payable by the hirer to
the owner of goods and the number of installments,
The due date for payment of each installment and
the mode of payment,
The person and place for the payment of amount
pursuant to clause (f).
If an installment can be paid by any mode other than
cash pursuant to clause (f) of sub-section (1), a brief description
thereof shall be specified in the hire-purchase contract.
If a hire-purchase contract has been made without
specifying any of the terms and conditions referred to in this
Section, the hirer may sue for the rescission of such contract, and if
the court thinks that non-specification of any of such terms and
conditions in the contract is detrimental to the hirer, the court may
rescind such contract or issue any such other order as it thinks fit.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"Hire purchase price" means the total amount to be paid
by the hirer to purchase or acquire the goods upon
payment of the full price of the goods, and also includes
an amount to be paid as deposit or down payment.
"Cash price" means the price to be paid in cash by
which the hirer may purchase any goods.
626. Conclusion of more than one contract to be deemed as
conclusion of single contract: (1) If several contracts are concluded
in connection with the making of a hire-purchase contract, namely a
contract between the hirer and the owner of any goods, a contract
between a surety guaranteeing the payment of installments of the
hire-purchase price of such goods or investor and the owner of such
goods on the condition of entering into a hire-purchase contract, or in
the case of any bailed or pledged goods, a contract between the
bailor and the bailee of such goods, the contracts shall be deemed to
be a single contract for the purposes of this Chapter.
If the contracts referred to in sub-section (1) are
concluded at different dates, the latest date shall be regarded as the
date of the formation of the contract.
627. Consequences of formation of hire-purchase contract: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the contract, the following
terms and conditions shall be deemed to be inherent in the hirepurchase contract concluded between the parties:
The hirer has the right of uninterrupted possession
and use of the hired goods,
The goods are free from any type of charge or
claim of any one at the time of transfer of the
goods by the owner to the hirer,
The owner of the goods has assured that the hirer
will have a reasonable opportunity to compare
such goods with the sample,
The owner of the goods has the right to sell the
hired goods at the time of the transfer of such
goods by him to the hirer,
The goods referred to in clause (a) are of
satisfactory quality at the time of the transfer of
goods,
If the hirer has informed the owner of the goods
that he or she is hiring the goods for any particular
purpose, the owner of the goods guarantees that
such goods or quality thereof will be appropriate
for that purpose.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of
sub-section (1), the owner of the goods shall not be liable for the
quality of the goods in any of the following circumstances:
The owner of the goods was not aware of the
defect in the goods, for which the hire-purchase
contract has been made at the time of conclusion
of such contract,
The hire-purchase contract itself has a stipulation
about the defect in the quality of the goods,
If the hirer has collected and examined a sample
of the goods and the quality of the goods matches
with such a sample,
The hire-purchase contract is concluded with
regard to any second-hand goods and that matter is
specified in the contract.
If the hirer takes any goods on hire on the basis of a
sample, the owner of the goods shall be deemed to have assured of
the fact that all of such goods match with the sample.
If the description of any goods or quality thereof is
specified in a contract concluded under this Chapter, the owner of
the goods shall be deemed to have assured of the fact that such
goods or quality thereof shall be as specified in the contract.
Provided that if the sample is also specified in the contract,
the matching of the quality of such goods with that of the sample
shall not suffice, and it shall be matched with the description of the
contract at the time of transferring the whole of the goods.
628. Transfer of ownership of goods: The ownership of the goods
related to a hire-purchase contract shall be transferred to the hirer
upon completion of the purchase according to the hire-purchase
price determined in accordance with the contract concluded under
this Chapter.
Provided that the right to possession and use shall be deemed
to be created at the time of receiving such goods by him or her.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"completion of the purchase" means the payment of the last
installment of the hire-purchase price.
629. Goods on hire to be cared (herchaha) and maintained: (1) The
status of the goods hired under a hire-purchase contract shall be as of
the bailment until the transfer of their ownership pursuant to Section
Except as otherwise provided for in the hire-purchase
contract, the hirer shall take reasonable care of (herbichar) and
maintain the goods related to such a contract as if the goods were
those owned by himself or herself.
If such goods are lost or damaged because of the
failure to take care of (herbichar) and maintain them pursuant to
sub-section (2), the hirer shall be liable therefor.
630. Installment to be paid: The hirer shall pay the amount of
installment as determined in the hire-purchase contract in
consideration for the hired goods, within such period and according
to such mode as specified in the contract.
631. Termination of contract by paying installment: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the hire-purchase contract, the hirer may,
during the currency of the contract, terminate the contract by
making payment of the hire-purchase price of the goods or
outstanding installment, and giving an advance written notice of at
least fifteen days to the owner of the goods.
(2) While terminating the contract pursuant to sub-section (1),
the hirer shall also be entitled to the discount of any kind, if any.
632. Termination of contract by returning goods: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the contract, the hirer may, at any time
prior to the payment of the last installment as determined according
to the hire-purchase contract for the goods, terminate the contract by
giving a written notice to the owner of goods at least fifteen days in
advance.
Prior to terminating the contract pursuant to subsection (1), the hirer shall deliver or return the hired goods to the
owner according to the hire-purchase contract and also pay the
amount, if any, due and payable by the hirer to the owner under the
contract on or before the termination of the contract.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
the hirer has already paid more than half of the hire purchase price
on or before the termination of the hire-purchase contract, the hirer
shall not be required to pay any more amount, and if the hirer has
paid less than half the amount, the hirer shall pay up to the half of the
amount.
Nothing contained in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to
release the hirer from payment of such other amount, charge or due
as may be payable according to the hire-purchase contract.
633. Right of hirer to transfer his or her right and interest: (1) The
hirer may, with the consent of the owner of the hired goods, transfer
to another person the right, interest or liability in the goods hired by
him or her according to the hire-purchase contract and such other
right, interest or liability as may be accrued to him or her under such
a contract.
(2) The owner of goods shall, for the purposes of sub-section
(1), give or refuse to give consent within fifteen days of the date of
the written request made by the hirer with the intention of getting
consent from the owner to transfer his or her right, interest or
liability to another person, and if consent cannot be obtained within
such a period, the owner shall be deemed to have refused the consent.
If the owner of goods makes a refusal pursuant to subsection (2), the hirer shall, within thirty-five days, make a lawsuit in
the court to have the refusal voided, and if the court issues an order
to the effect that the refusal is not reasonable, the consent shall be
deemed to have been obtained from the owner of goods.
If the right, interest or liability of the hirer is transferred
to another person by operation of law, nothing contained in this
Section shall be deemed to bar the exercise or performance of such
right, interest or liability.
634. To be liable for use of goods contrary to terms and conditions: If
the hirer uses the goods under the hire-purchase contract contrary to
the terms and conditions of such a contract, the hirer shall be liable
therefor.
635. Information of actual condition of goods to be given: If the
owner of goods demands the hirer using the goods under the hirepurchase contract to give information as to the place where the
concerned goods are situated and the state of benefits accrued from
such goods, the hirer shall give information thereof to the owner
within fifteen days.
636. The owner of goods may terminate contract: (1) If the hirer
defaults to pay more than one installment of the hire-purchase price
to be paid to the owner of goods according to the hire-purchase
contract, the owner of goods shall be entitled to terminate the hirepurchase contract at any time, by giving an advance notice as
follows to the hirer:
If the installment is to be paid within or less than
an interval of one week, a period of one week.
In the cases other than that referred to in clause (a),
a period of fifteen days.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the hirer makes payment of the installment and the interest, if any,
to be accrued thereon according to the hire-purchase contract before
the expiry of the period for giving an advance notice pursuant to the
said sub-section, the hire-purchase contract cannot be terminated.
If the hirer fails to perform the hire-purchase contract
or the terms and conditions referred to in Section 629 or 635, the
concerned owner of goods may terminate the hire-purchase contract,
by giving a notice of at least fifteen days.
In the event of termination of the contract pursuant to
sub-section (1) or (3), the owner of goods may exercise the
following rights in relation to the hired goods:
To take back the goods wherever and in whatever
situation they may be, and if the goods cannot be
so taken back, to forfeit them,
To determine the amount of rent that he or she can
recover out of the amount paid in lieu of such
goods, and inform the hirer to take back of the
exceeding amount,
To forfeit the amount, if any, taken as a deposit
from the hirer at the time of hiring the goods,
To enter the house where the goods are located
with the assistance of police in the course of
seizing the hired goods,
To recover compensation from the amount paid or
make a claim for the loss or damage caused from
the failure to return the hired goods in time or
failure to perform the contract or the terms and
conditions referred to in Section 629 or 635.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the hirer, surety or investor has already paid at least the
basic price of the hired goods, the owner of the goods shall not
entitled to terminate the hire-purchase contract under this Section.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"basic price" means three-fourths of the amount if the hire-price
amounts to up to fifty thousand rupees and at least half the price if
the hire-purchase price is more than that amount.
If the owner of goods terminates the hire-purchase
contract in contravention of sub-section (5), the hirer or surety shall
be in discharge of all liabilities to be fulfilled according to the hirepurchase contract and shall be entitled to refund the entire amount
paid for the goods hired by him or her.
Provided that the hirer shall return the hired goods to the
concerned owner of goods.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5),
a restriction to terminate the hire-purchase contract shall not be
deemed to bar in any manner the right to make a claim for the hirepurchase price to be received from the hirer according to the
contract.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the owner of goods may terminate the hire-purchase
contract entered into with the person who does not give information
referred to in Section 635 and, if any loss or damage is caused to
such goods, make claim for the same as well.
637. Rights of hirer in case of forfeiture of goods: (1) If the owner of
the goods hired pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (4) of Section
636 forfeits the goods, the hirer shall be entitled to refund the
amount paid in relation to the hire-purchase price up to the day of
forfeiture and the amount equal to the price of the goods on the day
of forfeiture from the owner.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"price of the goods on the day of forfeiture" means a sum that
remains after making deduction of the following amount or expense
from the proceeds of sale of the forfeited goods:
Reasonable expenses incurred in course of the
forfeiture of the goods,
Reasonable expenses incurred in the storage and
repair and maintenance of the goods until the sale
of the goods,
Reasonable expenses incurred in the sale or
otherwise transfer of the goods,
The amount paid for the taxes, charges, fees or
dues, if any, outstanding and payable by the hirer
for the goods according to the laws in force,
The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be paid
to the hirer within thirty days after the date of forfeiture of the
goods, and while making payment thereafter, an interest at the rate
of ten percent per year shall also be paid.
638. Status of hired goods in case of hirer becoming bankrupt: (1) If
the court holds, during the currency of a hire-purchase contract, that
the hirer has become a bankrupt or is likely to be a bankrupt
according to the laws in force, and as a consequence thereof, the
liquidator or any other equally competent person taking control of
the property of such a person shall exercise and fulfill the same
rights and obligations as the successor has with regard to the goods
under the hire-purchase contract.
If the hirer becomes bankrupt and the bankruptcy
proceedings are under consideration in any court, the liquidator or
the person exercising the right equal to that of the liquidator
pursuant to sub-section (1) may, having obtained permission of
such a court, transfer the goods under the hire-purchase contract to
another person in any manner, and if such goods are transferred in
such a manner, the transferee of the goods shall exercise and fulfill
the rights and obligations under the hire-purchase contract as if the
transferee were the hirer.
639. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Wages
640. Employment in work: (1) Any person who has attained at least
fourteen years of age may be employed in a work with his or her
consent.
Provided that a person who has not attained sixteen years of
age shall not be employed in a hazardous business or work.
While employing any one pursuant to sub-section (1),
the provisions of this Chapter shall be complied with, or caused to
be complied with.
641. Wages to be paid: (1) While employing any one in any work
pursuant to Section 640, the employer shall have to pay the wages
in proportion to the work except in cases where the employee
voluntarily agrees to work without wages.
While paying the wages pursuant to sub-section (1), if
any particular rate of wages is specified with the consent of the
employer and the employee, the wages shall be paid accordingly
and if no such rate is specified, the wages for the work shall be paid
according to the rate prevailing in the place of work.
Except as otherwise agreed upon between the employer
and the employee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the wages shall
be paid upon completion of the work.
While determining the wages according to this Section,
the wages shall be determined on the basis of each day of work
except as otherwise agreed upon between the employer and the
employee.
642. Provisions of safety measures to be made: A person shall employ
another person in a work only after making provisions of adequate
safety measures to prevent possible risks or danger in view of the
nature of work.
643. Prohibition of employing for more than eight hours: (1) A
person may not employ another person in a work under this Chapter
normally for more than eight hours a day.
If a person need to employ another in a work for a
period more than that set forth in sub-section (1), the consent of the
employee shall be obtained, and while so employing him or her in
the work, that person shall pay additional wages for each hour in
proportion to a day by calculating eight hours as one day.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the provisions of that sub-section shall not apply to the employment
of a domestic helper.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“domestic helper” means a person so employed in work that he or
she may be employed in a household work at any time as per
necessity.
644. Special provisions relating to domestic helpers: (1) If a person
employs another person as a domestic helper, the employer shall
also comply with the following terms and conditions, in relation to
the domestic helper:
To determine the wages monthly or annually basis
and pay the wages,
To provide meals three times viz. in the morning,
afternoon and evening, and clothes suitable to the
weather, according to the capacity of the employer,
To provide facilities for using appropriate housing,
toilet and bathroom facilities according to the
capacity of the employer,
In the case of a domestic helper below eighteen
years of age, to make provision for his or her
study at an appropriate time having regard to
household work if he or she so wishes,
To arrange for his or her treatment if the domestic
helper falls sick,
Provided that the expenses incurred in his
or her treatment may not be deducted from his or
her monthly or yearly wages.
Not to employ him or her in work while he or she
is sick, and, in other situations, not to employ him
or her in such a work that he or she may not be
able to do due to the age, ability or condition of
him or her,
If he or she dies, to bear the expenses incurred in
the performance of his or her funeral and
obsequies rites in a normal way,
Not to commit any inhumane or degrading
treatment or domestic violence,
To comply with the other terms and conditions
agreed upon between the employer and the
domestic helper.
The expenses incurred under clauses (b), (c) and (d) of
sub-section (1) may not be deducted from the monthly or yearly
wages of the domestic helper.
If a person employs another person as a domestic
helper, that person shall give written information thereof to the
concerned ward committee of the concerned Local Level within one
month after the date of such an employment.
645. Undertaken work not to be left incomplete: (1) If a person
assumes responsibility to do or undertakes to do any work, the
person shall not leave the work incomplete except for a reasonable
ground.
(2) If a person leaves a work incomplete as mentioned in
sub-section (1), the person leaving the work shall bear the
obligation therefor.
646. Wages to be paid to employee: (1) The employer shall pay such
wages as required to be paid for employment to the employee or
any other person whom he or she has consented to.
If the employee dies prior to the payment of wages
pursuant to sub-section (1), the wages he or she is entitled to shall
be paid to his or her nearest successor.
647. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved in relation to any
of the matters under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within three
months after the date of accrual of the cause of action in the case of

Section 644, and within thirty-five days in the case of the other
matters.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Indirect or Quasi-Contracts
648. Indirect
quasi-contract
deemed
made:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter-2 of this Part, if any
person does any certain, lawful, voluntary or unilateral act that may
give rise to a juridical relationship, an indirect or quasi-contract
shall be deemed to be made.
If an indirect or quasi-contract is made pursuant to subsection (1), an obligation under this Chapter shall be created from
the same fact.
649. If other’s property managed voluntarily, not to be abandoned
(negotiorum gestio): If a person manages or operates a business or
property of another person on his or her own without information to,
or authority from, that other person, the person shall, so long as
such business or property continues to exist, not abandon such
business or property without handing it over to that other person,
his or her successor or agent or until that other person removes him
or her.
650. To care (herbichar) or manage property taken in custody: (1) If
a person takes the custody of a property belonging to another
person for its care or management, the person shall take care of and
manage the property in good faith as if that were his or her own
property.
If a person who takes the custody of a property
pursuant to sub-section (1) causes loss or damage to the property
with malafide intention or recklessly, the person shall pay
compensation therefor.
651. Not absolved from obligation by delegation of authority: If a
person, who is entrusted by another person with a responsibility to
do any act, delegates any or all of his or her powers to another
person to do that act in a manner not to be prejudicial to the
obligation vis-à-vis that other person, the person shall not be free
from his or her own obligation by the reason of such delegation.
652. Reasonable costs to be paid for saving property in times of
disaster: If any person saves or protects any property in times of
disaster such as fire, flood, landslide, storm and earthquake without
giving information to its owner, the owner of property shall
reimburse the reasonable expenses incurred in saving or protecting
such property to such a person.
653. Right to claim reimbursement: (1) If a person, in spite of being
compelled by law to fulfill any obligation, fulfills such obligation at
his or her own expense and another person gets anything or benefit
due to the fulfillment of such an obligation or for any other reason,
the person fulfilling such an obligation may claim reimbursement of
the amount incurred therein from the person who so gets such thing
or benefit.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person fulfills any obligation for any illegal purpose, the person
shall not be entitled to claim reimbursement from the same.
654. Right to claim for maintenance: If a person rears and maintains
another person without giving information to the person obliged to
rear and maintain that other person, the person who so rears and
maintains shall be entitled to claim an amount for such rearing and
maintenance from the person under such obligation.
Provided that if he or she maintains such a person by way of
compassion or gratification or with intention to do so gratuitously,
he or she shall not be entitled to claim such an amount.
655. Successor to reimburse expenses incurred in obsequies of
deceased: If any person performs the funeral and obsequies acts of
a deceased in accordance with his or her rites, tradition and culture,
without giving information to the successor to or close relative of
the deceased and claims the expenses incurred in the performance
of such funeral and obsequies acts, the closest heir to, and, in the
absence of the heir, the relative of, the deceased shall reimburse that
person for the expenses.
656. To bear expenses in maintenance (palan poshan)of incompetent
person: If a person obliged to maintain (palan poshan)or take care
of (herbichar) a person of unsound mind, a person with physical
infirmity or a helpless minor having no income of his or her own
refuses to maintain such a person and any other person maintains
(palan poshan)or takes care of (herbichar) him or her, that other
person shall be entitled to claim reimbursement for the expenses
incurred therein from the person under such an obligation.
657. Treatment expenses to be reimbursed: If a person becomes
seriously ill owing to an accident or other reason and any other
person, except his or her heir living in the joint family, relative or
close person, conducts, or causes to be conducted medical treatment
of him or her voluntarily, the heir, relative or close person to him
shall reimburse that other person who has conducted, or caused to
be conducted, the treatment for the expenses incurred in such
treatment.
Provided that if the treatment has been conducted, or caused
to be conducted, with the intention of doing so gratuitously, the
expenses need not be reimbursed.
658. To bear expenses made by public bodies: If a person voluntarily
omits to follow the necessary health or safety measures required to
be followed according to law for the protection of body, life or
property of him or her or of the public, and if any government or
public body follows, or causes to be followed, such measures, the
person shall pay reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose even
if he or she does not agree to follow, or cause to be followed, such
measures.
659. To reimburse amount paid by person interested in: If a contract
is so concluded that a person promises to pay any amount which
another person is bound by law to pay and if that person fails to pay
it, and other person who has to pay, pays it, the person concluding a
contract shall reimburse such an amount to that person.
660. To pay price or remuneration: If a person delivers any goods to
or does any work for another person, that other person shall pay the
price of such goods or service or remuneration of the work to the
person.
661. Right to recover price of goods or services: If a person has
supplies any goods or service to another person who is incapable of
conclusion of a contract under law or any one whom such incapable
person is legally responsible to support, the person may recover the
price of such goods or service from the person receiving such goods
or service.
662. Property in custody to be kept as bailed property: If a person
keeps in any manner in his or her custody property owned by
another as may be retained according to law, such a person shall
keep such property as a property under bailment.
663. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
two years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-16
Provisions Relating to Unjust Enrichment
664. Unjust enrichment to be deemed: (1) If any person gets any benefit
or advantage from another person, without for the reason of doing
any lawful act or fulfilling any obligation, the person who so gets the
benefit or advantage shall be deemed to have got an unjust
enrichment.
A person shall be deemed to have got an unjust
enrichment under sub-section (1) in any of the following
circumstances:
If there is an increment in his or her property or
decrease in his or her liability,
If he or she receives a service from another or causes
another to do a work,
If other’s property is used for him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), even if any person gets any goods, service, benefit or
advantage in any manner, except in any of the following
circumstances, he or she shall be deemed to have got an unjust
enrichment:
If any goods, service, benefit or advantage can be
obtained from any person under a law or contract,
If the person, from whom any goods, service, benefit
or advantage have been obtained, has agreed with
free consent not to take back or reimburse the same.
In determining whether or not and to what extent any
person has got an unjust enrichment under this Chapter, no
consideration shall be granted to any disadvantage or loss or damage
caused thereby to him or her after he or she has got the unjust
enrichment.
If a person gets an unjust enrichment pursuant to this
Section, the person shall bear the obligation under this Chapter.
665. Thing taken by mistake to be returned (solutio indebiti): If any
person takes or receives by mistake any goods which he or she is not
entitled to take or receive, he or she shall return the goods to the
person from whom he or she has taken or received them.
666. To pay back debt paid by mistake: If a person pays a debt to
another person by mistake because the person thinks that he or she is
bound to do so and proves that he or she is not bound to pay such
debt, that other person who receives such amount shall return it to
him or her.
667. To return goods or amount taken with malafide intention and
benefits accrued therefrom: (1) If any person receives from another
person with malafide intention any amount or goods in which he or
she has no claim, he or she shall return to that other person such
amount or goods and the interest to be chargeable on such amount
under the law or the advantage or return accrued from such goods,
from the date of receipt of such amount or goods to the date of their
return.
If the amount or goods received pursuant to sub-section
(1) are lost or damaged for any reason, he or she shall also pay the
compensation therefor.
668. To pay debt paid by third person: If a debt payable by a person is
paid by a third person without the debtor's knowledge, the debtor
shall pay the debt to the person who has so paid it.
669. Right to claim reimbursement if payable tax paid by another
person: If a tax payable by a person is paid by another person, that
other person who has so paid the tax may claim reimbursement
therefor from the person who is obliged to pay it.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “tax”
means any type of government fee, charge, tariff, duty and fine, and
also includes a local tax.
670. Goods found may be kept upon giving information to police: (1)
If any person finds any goods in any manner, he or she may, having
given a notice thereof, along with actual description thereof, to the
police, safely retain such goods with him or her until the concerned
owner is found.
The concerned owner shall bear the expenses incurred
in finding the owner of goods referred to in sub-section (1) and
retaining such goods, and the finder of goods may retain the goods
until the payment of such expenses.
If no person appears to claim the goods retained
pursuant to sub-section (1) until three years, the goods shall belong
to the finder.
671. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done
or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within two
years after the date of accrual of the cause of action.

Chapter-17
Provisions Relating to Torts
672. Tort deemed to be committed: (1) No person shall cause loss or
damage, in any manner, to another person's body, life or property or
legally protected right or interest by the reason of commission or
omission done, whether by any default, negligence or recklessness
on the part of himself or herself or of any one else to whom he or
she must bear obligation according to this Chapter.
If the parties do not have any prior contractual
relationship in relation to any commission or omission referred to in
sub-section (1), the loss or damage resulted from such a
commission or recklessness shall be deemed to be a tort.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"omission" means the state of failure of a person to do any act
which the person is bound to do.
A person who commits a tort pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall bear liability under this Chapter.
673. Parents to bear liability: The father and mother jointly living with
a minor below fourteen years of age, or if there is no father or
mother, the person who exercises paternal authority over him or her
shall be liable for a tort committed by such a minor.
674. Guardian or curator to bear liability: The guardian or curator of
a person of unsound mind shall be responsible for and accordingly
bear liability for any loss or damage caused by such a person.
675. Employer to bear liability: (1) Any person, firm, company or
organization who employs a domestic helper, other worker or
employee in a work shall be liable for the loss or damage to another
person, if any, resulted from any act done in good faith by such a
helper, worker or employee in the course of doing such a work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the worker or employee shall be personally liable for any act which
he or she has done negligently or dishonestly.
676. Owner of animal to bear liability for loss or damage caused by
animal: The owner of an animal which is kept by or under the
control of him or her shall be liable for any loss or damage caused
by the animal to any one.
Provided that the owner of animal shall not be liable for any
loss or damage caused by the animal while being appropriately
controlled by the owner by taking adequate safety measures
according to its behavior or caused as a result of any act, default or
negligence of the loss or damage sustaining person himself or
herself.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"animal" means a domestic animal or wildlife or avian of any type
under one's control, and also includes a domestic, reptile or wild
avian as well.
677. House-owner to bear liability for loss or damage caused by its
collapse: The concerned house-owner shall be liable for any kind of
loss or damage, if any, caused to any one as a result of the collapse
of the house, in whole or in part, or by any part of the house,
whether during, or after the completion of, its construction.
678. Owner of property to bear liability: The concerned property
owner shall be liable for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any
one as a result of the following:
An explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety
measures properly according to the nature of a machine,
equipment or engine,
A fire or explosion owing to a failure to adopt safety
measures properly according to the nature of any
inflammable or explosive substance,
Emission of excessive smoke, noise by any industrial
enterprise in contravention of the specified standards,
A tree lying down or laid down on any highway, road,
street or way except due to a disaster or an act by any
third person,
Discharge of any infected or toxic substance or
communicable disease carrying substance openly
through a canal, ditch, pipe or sewerage, without
adopting
precautionary
measures
properly,
contravention of the specified standards.
679. House-head to bear liability: The concerned house-head shall be
liable for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any one as a result of
any kind of solid waste or goods thrown from the house.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
"House" means a house or shed, and also includes the
structure of a house.
"House-head" means a person who acts as the chief of
family, and also includes, in the case of a tenant
renting other’s house, the person who acts as the chief
of the tenant’s family.
680. To bear liability for trespass: A person who commits trespass to
other's property shall be liable for any loss or damage resulted from
the trespass.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"trespass" means an unlawful entry into, taking possession of
products of, unauthorized damage to, interference in, or unlawful
encroachment on, a property that is under entitlement, possession or
ownership of another person, in the case of an immovable property,
and forcibly taking into custody, taking away, taking the advantage
arising out of, or causing obstruction or hindrance in the use of, the
property under entitlement, possession or ownership of another
person, in the case of a movable property, and also includes an act
of taking control of any type of property in an unauthorized manner.
681. To bear liability jointly: (1) If more than one person commit any
act to be deemed a tort under this Chapter, each of such persons
shall, except as otherwise proved, be jointly and severally liable for
any damage caused by that act, in proportion to the culpability of
the tort committed by each person.
If separate liability can be determined in proportion to
the culpability of tort pursuant to sub-section (1), liability shall be
borne accordingly, and if such determination cannot be made, all
persons responsible for the tort shall bear liability on an equal basis.
682. Compensation to be paid for liability: (1) While bearing liability
for a tort committed under this Chapter, the person who commits
the tort shall pay compensation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any tort is committed under this Chapter as a result of any
omission, fault, recklessness or negligence of the injured person
also, the quantum of such compensation shall be lesser.
The compensation referred to in sub-section (1) shall
be limited to the actual loss or damage, and remote or unactual
compensation shall not be recoverable.
The compensation may be of any type, in the form of
either cash or kind or service.
If any loss or damage is caused under this Chapter, a
person who suffers shall be entitled to claim for compensation,
subject to this Chapter.
If a claim is made for compensation pursuant to subsection (5), the court may order reasonable compensation to be paid.
683. Not to bear liability if separate provision is made: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
tort for which liability is to be borne under this Chapter is treated as
a criminal offence under a law, or this Act or other law contains a
separate provision or provides for a separate legal remedy in
relation to such a tort, no liability under this Chapter may be borne.
Subject to sub-section (1), if the alleged tortfeasor
proves that the tort for which liability is to be borne under this
Chapter was resulted not from his or her negligence, recklessness,
fault or omission but from any other reason, he or she shall be
released from the liability for such a tort.
684. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
six months after the date on which such an act was done or action
was taken.

Chapter-18
Provisions Relating to Liability for Defective Products
685. To be liable for defective product: (1) No person shall produce
any defective product and sell or distribute, or cause to be sold or
distributed, any defective goods or service.
The producer of a defective product referred to in subsection (1) shall bear liability under this Chapter for the loss or
damage, if any, caused to the body, life or property of any person as
a result of the consumption of such product sold or distributed by
any one.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"Defective product" means any goods or service which,
for any of the following reasons, lack the minimum
safety measures that a person of general prudence
reasonably expects while consuming any product:
Defective design, manufacturing, processing or
installation,
Defective packing, safety or storage,
Defective presentation,
Lacking adequate measures or precautions to
control the potential risk or danger according to
the nature of the produced good or service.
"Producer" means a producer who ultimately produces,
sells and distributes any defective goods or service, and
also includes the following person:
(a) The distributor or seller if the producer cannot be
traced out,
(b) In the case of any imported product, the importer
of the defective product or the distributor or seller
of such product.
"Good" means any industrial product for consumption
by the public.
686. Claimant to prove that product is defective: If any person makes
a claim that any good or service is a defective product and he or she
has suffered injury to his or her body, life or property from the
consumption thereof, he or she shall prove that there is the
relationship between such defective product and the injury, and that
such injury has resulted solely from the consumption of such
product.
687. To be in discharge of liability: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 685, the producer shall not be liable if he or
she proves any of the following facts:
He or she has not produced, sold or distributed the
defective product,
The goods or service that he or she produced,
imported, sold or distributed was not defective at
the time of production, import, sale or distribution
or it became defective after the sale or distribution,
The goods or service that he or she produced has
not been marketed, sold or distributed,
The injury has been caused due to the consumer's
failure to comply with the directions to be
complied with while consuming the produced
goods or service,
The injury has been caused because the consumer
has not properly consumed the product or has
consumed it otherwise,
One had no scientific or technical knowledge at
the time of production or distribution of the goods
or service that such goods or service was defective,
Information was given at the time of sale of the
product, from which the injury has been caused,
that it might cause injury if not consumed properly,
The goods or service has been consumed despite
knowing or having a reasonable reason to know
that it might cause loss or damage.
688. Quantum of liability may be reduced: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is proved that the injury
has been caused due to both the producer and the consumer of a
defective product, the producer's liability may be reduced
proportionately.
Provided that if such injury has resulted in a loss or damage
to a third party, the quantum of liability may not be reduced in the
case of such a party.
689. Product not deemed to be defective: Goods or service consumed
by a person shall not be considered to be a defective product merely
by the reason that any goods or service of quality higher than that of
such goods or service is available in the market.
690. Not to prejudice other right: Nothing contained in this Chapter
shall prejudice the right, interest or claim available under a law or
contract to any person whose body, life or property has been
affected from a defective product.
691. Statute of limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act
done or action taken under this Chapter may make a lawsuit within
one year from the date on which such an act was done or action
taken.

Part-6
Provisions Relating to Private International Law
692. Provisions of this Part to apply: (1) The provisions of this Part
shall apply to any matter relating to private legal relationship
involving a foreigner, foreign object or any act done in a foreign
country.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1),
the provisions of this sub-section shall apply, in particular, to the
following matters:
Legal status of a foreigner and his or her capacity,
Matters relating to matrimonial relationship, paternal
and maternal and other family relationship or partition
or succession, with at least one of the related parties
whereof being a foreigner, or the place of execution of
any act or action related thereto being situated outside
Nepal,
Matter relating to a property situated in a foreign
country, with at least one of the concerned parties
being a foreigner,
Matter relating to a contractual or non-contractual right
or obligation, with at least one party being a foreigner,
Matter relating to a contract made in a foreign country.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Part, the term
“foreigner” means a foreign natural person or body corporate, and
also includes a foreign state.
693. Legal capacity of foreigner to be determined: (1) The legal
capacity of any foreign natural person shall be determined
according to the law of the country of his or her nationality.
If the nationality of a foreign natural person cannot be
ascertained pursuant to sub-section (1), his or her capacity shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his or her
habitual residence, and even if such residence cannot be ascertained,
according to the law of the country where he or she is residing for
the time being.
The legal capacity or status of a body corporate shall
be determined according to the law of the country where it is
registered, if the country of registration cannot be so ascertained,
according to the law of the country where the headquarters of such
body is located, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained,
according to the law of the country where the place of transaction
of such a body is located.
694. Presumption of disappearance or death of foreigner: (1) If a
presumption of the disappearance or death of a foreigner has to be
made, the matter shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his or her nationality.
If the nationality of a foreigner cannot be ascertained
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be determined according to the
law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and even if such
residence cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country
of his or her residence immediately before making presumption of
his or her disappearance or death.
695. Successor to be determined according to foreign law: While
determining the successor to a foreigner residing in Nepal when his
or her property is open for succession, the successor shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his or her
nationality, if such country cannot be determined, according to the
law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such
residence cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country
where he or she is residing for the time being.
696. Determination of succession of deceased: (1) If succession is
open because of the death of any foreigner in Nepal and it is
therefore necessary to determine his or her successor to the property
situated in Nepal and the order of preference thereof, it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his or her
nationality at the time of his or her death.
If the law referred to in sub-section (1) cannot be
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his or her habitual residence at the time of his or her
death, and if even such country cannot be ascertained, according to
the law of Nepal.
697. Determination of the nature of corporate body: Question as
regards whether a company, foundation or other corporate body is
public or private shall be determined according to the law of the
country of incorporation of such a company, foundation or body,
and if such law cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the
country where the registered office or headquarters of such a
company, foundation or corporate body is situated.
698. Regulation of property: (1) Succession to a movable property
shall be governed by the law of the country of habitual residence of
the deceased at the time of his or her death.
Succession to an immovable property shall be
governed by the law of the country where such property is situated.
699. Citizen of Nepal to follow law of Nepal while concluding
marriage abroad: (1) A citizen of Nepal shall, while concluding a
marriage in a foreign country, comply with such competency,
qualification and conditions for marriage as specified by the law of
Nepal.
The formalities to be fulfilled by a citizen of Nepal
while concluding a marriage in a foreign country shall be governed
by the law of the country where the marriage is concluded.
Provided that while concluding a marriage at an
embassy or consulate general of Nepal situated in a foreign country,
the formalities referred to in the law of Nepal shall be followed.
A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-sections
(1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.
700. Foreigner to follow law of his or her country while concluding
marriage in Nepal: (1) While concluding a marriage between
foreigners or between a foreigner and a citizen of Nepal in Nepal,
each person entering into marriage shall comply with the capacity,
qualification and condition as specified by the law of the respective
country of his or her nationality.
(2) The formalities to be fulfilled by the foreigners while
concluding marriage in Nepal shall be governed by the law of Nepal.
Provided that while concluding a marriage at a foreign
embassy or consulate general situated in Nepal, the formalities
referred to in the law of the concerned country shall be fulfilled.
A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-sections
(1) and (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.
701. Consequence of marriage to be according to law of one’s
country: (1) The matrimonial relationship between the couple after
the marriage and the consequence of marriage shall be determined
according to the law of the country of their nationality if both
spouses have the same nationality, and if the country of their
nationality is not the same, according to the law of the country of
their habitual residence and if even such a country is not the same,
according to the law of the country of their residence for the time
being.
If the consequence of marriage cannot be determined
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be determined according to the
law of the country of their marriage.
702. Paternal authority to be governed by law of the country of
nationality: (1) The relationship between father, mother and son,
daughter including paternal authority shall be governed by the law
of the country of nationality of the son or daughter, as the case may
If the law referred to in sub-section (1) is not
ascertained, it shall be governed by the law of the country of
habitual residence of the father, mother and, if even such country
cannot be ascertained, by the law of the country of their residence
for the time being.
703. To be governed by the law of the country of nationality of
adoptive person: Subsequent to the adoption of a son or daughter,
the relationship between the adoptive person and the adopted son or
daughter shall be governed by the law of the country of nationality
of the adoptive person, and if such law cannot be ascertained, by
the law of the country of habitual residence of the adoptive person,
and if even such law cannot be ascertained, by the law of the
country where the adoptive parents are habitually spending marital
life.
704. Determination of guardianship or curatorship: (1) The
guardianship or curatorship of an incompetent or quasi-competent
person shall be determined according to the law of the country of
nationality of that person.
If the country referred to in sub-section (1) cannot be
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such country
cannot be ascertained, according to the law of the country of his or
her habitual residence for the time being.
The relationship between the guardian or curator and
the person under his or her guardianship or curatorship shall be
determined according to the law of the country of the guardian or
curator or the law of the country where the guardian or curator is
appointed as such.
Provided that if the habitual residence of the person who is
under guardianship or curatorship is in Nepal, it shall be determined
according to the law of Nepal.
705. To be determined according to the law of residence: (1) The
matter of separation of bread and board shall be governed by the
law of the country of habitual residence of the married couple.
If, in governing the matter pursuant to sub-section (1),
the country of habitual residence of the couple is not the same, it
shall be governed by the law of the last country of their habitual
residence, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained, by the
law of the court where the case of alimony is sub judice.
706. Divorce effected abroad to be recognized: If a divorce is effected
between the citizens of Nepal or between a citizen of Nepal and a
foreigner in a foreign country, such a divorce shall, if effected in
accordance with the law of that country, be recognized and
enforced in Nepal in accordance with the law of Nepal.
707. Content of ownership to be determined according to law of
country where property is situated: (1) The content of ownership
or possession of any property shall be determined according to the
law of the country where such property is situated.
A question as regards the maintenance or termination
of ownership in an immovable property shall be determined
according to the law of the country where such property is situated.
708. Goods to be governed by law of destination: Any goods in transit
in the course of carriage shall be governed by the law of their
destination.
709. Governing law of contract to be as determined by parties: (1)
The governing law of any contract shall be as determined in the
contract by its parties.
If no law is determined pursuant to sub-section (1),
such a contract shall be governed by the law of the country of its
performance, and if even such a country cannot be ascertained, by
the law of the country where it was concluded.
Provided that a contract concluded in Nepal shall be
governed by the law of Nepal.
710. Deed executed abroad to be recognized: The validity of any
contract or deed executed outside Nepal shall be determined
according to the law of the country where it has been executed, and
such a contract or deed shall be deemed lawful and recognized in
Nepal if it has been duly executed in accordance with the law of
that country.
711. To be governed by law of nationality of donor: (1) The matter
concerning validity of a donation or gift shall be governed by the
law of the country of donor's nationality existing when the donation
or gift was made.
If the formalities are completed according to the law of
the country where a donation or gift is given, the donation or gift
shall be deemed to be duly given.
712. Determination of liability for tort: (1) While determining the
liability for an act which, according to law constitutes a tort,
involving a foreigner, foreign object or act done in a foreign
country, it shall be determined according to the law of the country
where such an act has been taken place.
If any act referred to in sub-section (1) originates in
one country and results in consequence in another country, the
liability shall be determined according to the law of the country
where the consequence so results.
If the liability cannot be determined pursuant to subsection (2), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country where the tortious act has been committed.
713. Liability for quasi-contract or unjust enrichment: The liability
for a quasi-contract or unjust enrichment shall be determined
according to the law of the country where such an act has been done.
714. Other matters to be determined according to recognized
principles of private international law: (1) While determining
any matter that is not dealt with in this Part involving a foreigner,
foreign object or act done in a foreign country, such a matter shall
be determined according to the law of Nepal, if Law of Nepal
provides separate provision in relation to that matter, and failing
such separate provision, according to the recognized principles of
private international law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if all parties of the relevant matter so agree, the matter referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be determined according to the law of Nepal.
715. In case of double nationality, law of country of habitual
residence to be applied: (1) If this Part contains a provision to the
effect that any matter is determined according to the law of the
country of nationality and a person is having nationality of two or
more countries at the same time, his or her nationality shall be
determined according to the law of the county of his or her
nationality, where he or she habitually resides.
If such a matter cannot be determined according to the
law of the country referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his or her
nationality, to which he or she has most closest connection.
Provided that in the case of a person who holds also the
citizenship of Nepal or who has habitual residence in Nepal or is a
non-resident Nepali citizen, it shall be determined according to the
law of Nepal.
If the matter referred to in sub-section (1) concerns a
refugee or stateless person, it shall be determined according to the
law of the country of his or her habitual residence, and if even such
a law cannot be determined, according to the law of the country of
his or her residence for the time being.
716. Power to give permission for trial of case by foreign court: (1) If
both parties to a case which involves a foreign party and is sub
judice in a court of Nepal make a joint petition to the court,
specifying the reason that it is appropriate and practicable for that
case to be resolved by a court of the country of residence of such
party and the matter is found reasonable upon examination of the
petition, the court may give permission for the proceedings of the
case by the foreign court as demanded by the parties to such a case.
Once the court has given permission for the proceeding
of a case by a foreign court pursuant to sub-section (1), no
proceeding shall be made again by a court of Nepal in the same
matter.
717. Power to adjourn case sub judice in court of Nepal: If any case
between the parties is sub judice in a court of Nepal and a case is
running also in a foreign court between such parties in the same
matter, and the parties, having considered that the case pending in
the court of Nepal is likely to be directly affected by a judgment to
be made in the case between them running in the foreign court,
apply for the adjournment of the case running in Nepal, the court
may adjourn such a case until their case pending in the foreign
court is adjudged.
718. Court of Nepal to have jurisdiction: A court of Nepal shall have
jurisdiction to adjudicate the proceedings and settle any disputes
arising in connection with the following matters:
A matter between the foreigners who reside in Nepal or
between a foreigner and a citizen of Nepal, that is
governed by this Act or other law,
(b) A matter of a case of which a foreigner residing in Nepal
is a defendant,
A matter as regards the succession of a foreigner who
resided in Nepal and had property in Nepal at the time of
his or her death,
(d) A matter concerning payment to be made in Nepal on a
financial transaction or dealing made abroad between a
citizen of Nepal and a foreigner,
A matter between foreigners or between a foreigner and a
citizen of Nepal, concerning a property situated in Nepal,
A matter concerning a contract concluded in or to be
performed in Nepal between foreigners or to which at
least one party is a citizen or body corporate of Nepal,
(g) A matter concerning a tort, quasi-contract or unjust
enrichment committed outside Nepal, where both parties
are citizens of Nepal or foreigners who have habitual
residence in Nepal,
(h) A matter to be adjudicated by a court of Nepal under subsection (2) of Section 699.
719. Other matters concerning a case may also be settled by court of
Nepal: If it appears that any other matter related to any case
involving a foreigner instituted in a court of Nepal under its
jurisdiction to settle the main dispute should also be settled, the
court may assume its jurisdiction over that matter also and settle it
accordingly.
720. Treaty, if any, to apply: If any treaty to which Nepal is a party
contains a separate provision on any matter set forth in this Part,
nothing contained in this Part shall affect such provision.
721. Provisions of this Part not to apply: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Part, if the application of any legal
provision under this Part in Nepal would be contrary to public order,
the provision contained in this Part shall not be applicable in such
circumstance.
If there arises a circumstance referred to in sub-section
(1), the matters contained in this Part shall be governed by other
linking criteria, and if such criteria cannot be determined, by the
law of Nepal.

===== SOURCE: National-Civil-Procedure-Code(2074).pdf =====

THE DRAFT OF
CIVIL CODE,
CIVIL PROCEDURES CODE
AND REPORT, 2010
Government of Nepal
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
KATHMANDU
CIVIL CODE
Publisher:
Ministry of Law and Justice
Number of Copies:
Publication Assistance:
Enhancing Access to Justice Project
Thapagaon, New Baneshwor
Copyright:
With the publisher
Printed by:
New Era Offset Press
Government of Nepal
Personal Secretariat of Minister of Law and Justice
Hon’ble Prem Bahadur Singh
Message
The civil law of Nepal is being mainly regulated and managed by the
Muluki Ain (Country Code) enacted and brought into force on the 1st
of August, 1963. On the one hand the civil law provisions in the
Country Code are extremely primitive, while on the other, the modern
principles of civil law have been scattered in other Nepal laws as the
Code could not accommodate those principles. Since the principles of
civil law enshrined in the prevailing laws could not respond to the
necessity and requirements of the open, liberal and democratic system
of governance of the 21st century, therefore, the need of formulating a
separate Civil Code amending and consolidating the provisions of
civil law was felt long time back.
The country ushered in republican form of government after the
election to the Constituent Assembly in 2008 as a result of the historic
second people’s movement. In order to reform and modernize the
existing civil law of the country according to the existing economic,
social and cultural situation according to the spirit of republic and to
prepare the drafts of Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code,
Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers) had formed a civil law
reform and consolidation task force on December 3, 2008 under the
convenorship of Mr. Khilaraj Regmi, Hon’ble Justice of Supreme
Court. The task force has prepared the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code according to its mandate within the given time and
submitted it to Government of Nepal. I am happy to publish and share
with general public these drafts.
It is my sincere belief that if the drafts, which have been prepared by
the task force with deep study, wide discussions and massive
consultation with the relevant stakeholders, could take the form of
Acts, there would be significant breakthrough in civil law
administration of the country.
Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers) has directed Ministry of
Law and Justice to take necessary actions and to make public these
drafts. The ministry has initiated the process of seeking feedbacks
from the relevant stakeholders and these drafts have been published
for making people informed about them and to seek comments and
feedbacks from general public as well. I would like to assure all that
after obtaining feedbacks and comments and suggestions from all
stakeholders and general people, the ministry will submit Bills to
Legislature-Parliament with high priority after fulfilling the required
procedures.
Finally, on behalf of Government of Nepal, I would like to extend
sincere thanks to the Convenor, members of the task force and other
relevant persons who have fulfilled this burdensome responsibility of
preparing the draft having adjusted their busy schedules and engaged
in morning, evening and public holidays.
Kathmandu, October 7, 2010.
Minister
Law and Justice
Foreword
Civil law is the charter of civil relationship of every country. It is the
only instrument on the basis of which relationship between citizens is
regulated and managed. Since day-to-day behavior and relationship of
citizens are operated by principles of civil law, it is of utmost
importance in the civil life.
In 1853, the Country Code was first enacted having consolidated the
then civil law principles and we are at the present situation with
amendment to that Code from time-to-time. The provisions made in
the Code are in the primitive stage and it is sure that they could not
respond to the changing need of the time, the liberalized policy
adopted by the country, provisions made in the international human
rights instruments to which Nepal is a party and the principles
developed and recognized in international arena in the field of civil
law. In this context, it is a matter of national priority to reform and
modernize the civil law of the country.
There have been efforts in the past to reform civil law. However, the
purpose of those efforts was not to integrate and codify entire civil
law. Realizing this need, Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers)
had formed a Taskforce under the convenorship of a Justice of the
Supreme Court on the recommendation of the Judicial Council and
prescribed the terms of reference of the Taskforce.
The Taskforce has prepared the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code subject to the prescribed terms of reference. While
performing its tasks, the Taskforce has prepared the drafts having
studied, reviewed and analyzed the existing civil law, the principles
laid down by the Supreme Court, the provisions made in the treaties to
which Nepal is a party, Nepal’s social and cultural characteristics, the
Civil Codes of the countries which have codified their civil laws (such
as Japan, France, the Philippines, Italy), and the substantive and
procedural laws of the neighboring countries.
There may be debate as to whether or not codification is the
appropriate way of reforming and modernizing law. The task of
managing the scattered provisions of law in one Act is itself a
challenging job and it is possible only by way of codification. The
process of codification of laws in Nepal seems to be relevant as in the
recent past, there has been a growing trend of codification even in the
countries which did not have experience of codification in the past and
codification of civil law by two of the South-East Asian countries
(Vietnam and Cambodia) just a few years ago. It is the belief of the
Taskforce that with the implementation of the proposed two drafts,
there will be qualitative reform on the civil law of Nepal and modern
national legal system will be established in the country through simple
and comprehensive law.
Drafting of law itself is a difficult, time-taking and technical work.
The Taskforce is of the view that drafting of civil law which covers
vast and wide areas of civic relationship is much more difficult and
challenging. Though effort has been made in the drafts prepared by
the Taskforce to give it a final touch from conceptual as well as
drafting point of view, it is not that there may not be any room for
further improvement. Since the provisions have been made having had
deep studies and intensive discussions on each of them, the concerned
agencies would make efforts on the matters to be improved on the
drafts without tempering the underlying concepts in them.
Law reform is a perennial process and it would attract in cases of the
proposed codes. I express my heartfelt gratitude to Government of
Nepal (Council of Ministers) and Judicial Council on the capacity of
the convener of the Taskforce for entrusting this significant
responsibility having formed the Taskforce in my convenership after
taking policy decision to take the convenorship and leadership of the
by a Justice of the Supreme Court.
In this important task of modernization of civil law by reform and
modification
preparation
drafts,
intensive
unprecedented cooperation is extended from national and international
organization and persons. The Taskforce is grateful to all the
institutions,
organizations
persons
extending
invaluable
suggestions in reforming the drafts. The Taskforce also extends thanks
to Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo of the Keio University, Japan; Prof. Satoshi
Minamikata of the Niigata University, Japan and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki
Kihara of the Asia University, Japan and Mr. Taro Morinaga, Lecturer,
Ministry of Justice, Japan for providing suggestions by examining the
drafts of the Taskforce. The Taskforce also extends its heartfelt thanks
to the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Government of
Japan for providing opportunity to the Taskforce to have interaction
with the Professors in Japan and to observe the various aspects of use
of the civil law in Japan.
Similarly, the Taskforce expresses gratitude to Hon’ble Justices of the
Supreme Court for making contribution in improving the drafts giving
their invaluable suggestions on the proposed drafts.
I would like to thank the Supreme Court, Office of Attorney General,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Nepal Bar Association and its
Chairperson and the Enhancing Access to Justice Project of UNDP for
extending support to the Secretariat of the Taskforce. The Taskforce
has highly evaluated the contribution of the Appellate court judges,
District court judges of the concerned areas, lawyers, government
lawyers, court employees, human rights activists and employees
engaged in quasi-judicial bodies, stakeholders and civil society
members for being present and making contribution during the
discussion. All of them deserve thanks.
I would like to extend heartfelt thanks to the invited member, the Joint
Secretary Mr. Kedar Paudel, Mr. Keshariraj Pandey, the judge of
Appellate Court invited as an expert, the Under Secretaries duo Mr.
Kailash Prasad Subedi and Mr. Basudev Neupane engaged in
preparing the drafts, Section Office Mr. Surendra Kumar Bajracharya,
Mr. Keshav Prasad Dahal, the Project Manager of the Enhancing
Access to Justice Project and other staff.
Finally, I am grateful to all members of the Taskforce for their
untiring hard work and labour during morning, evening and on public
holidays continuously in performing the task entrusted to the
Taskforce on time irrespective of their respective regular professional
and service-related works.
Kathmandu.
August 11, 2010
(Khilaraj Regmi)
Justice, Supreme Court and
Convener, Civil Raw Reform and
Modification Taskforce
Government of Nepal
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Being a law to regulate day-to-day civil and social relationship among
citizens in any country, civil law is has very crucial role in civil life.
The principles of civil law are being practiced since the very
beginning of human civilization and they are in practice even today in
their modified forms in various legal systems. The Roman law is one
classic example of such vivid realities.
It would not be an overstatement to say that the civil law in Nepal has
come to the present form being developed as a blend of principles of
the ancient Hindu law, the Common law, Continental law and some of
Nepal’s own unique local principles. However, some of the principles
of the civil law of Nepal are being directed by the jurisprudential
principles of civil law and principles laid down by the Supreme Court
rather than by legislation enacted by the legislature. In the context of
the open and market-oriented economy, the obligations arising out of
international treaties to which Nepal is a party and the development of
liberal and democratic society, several principles of the existing civil
law have already been incomplete and irrelevant. To speak truly, there
is lack of proper laws on so many subjects of civil law in Nepal.
In the changed context, reform in the system of governance is one of
the major agendas of the country and law reform has been regarded as
one of its inseparable parts. The government has adopted a policy of
continuing law reform with a view to make the legal system of Nepal
rich, improved, modern and according to needs of 21st century. As a
part of this endeavor, preparation is underway to formulate drafts of
Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code and to introduce them in
Legislature-Parliament in the form of Bills.
As the country has been passing through a transitional phase, it might
be argued that law reform is not a necessity at this difficult stage.
However, this time has to be taken as an opportunity because of the
fact that reform process could be accelerated during difficult times
and desired goals could be achieved, though law reform is a perennial
process and it is ever lasting. For the first time, an effort has been
made for substantial reform of the overall legal system of the country
and if this reform could be transformed into practice, there is no doubt
that the achievements to be derived from it will have long-lasting
place.
The drafts and report prepared by the Taskforce formed by
Government of Nepal for modification and reform of civil law in
Nepal has been submitted to Government of Nepal (Council of
Ministers) and directives has been given to this Ministry to take
necessary actions on it. Once the process of consultation with the
relevant stakeholders is over, these drafts will be forwarded in the
form of Bills. The drafts received from the Taskforce may not be
complete in itself and there may be areas of reform as well. In order to
facilitate the access of the drafts to the stakeholders, the drafts and
report thereof has been uploaded in the website and are being
published in the form of a book. I would like to request all concerned
persons/organizations to render their respective assistance in
additional modification and reform in the drafts.
Kathmandu
October 7, 2010
(Madhab Paudel)
Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice
ENHANCING ACCESS TO JUSTICE PROJECT
(NEP/08/007)
Remark
Protection and promotion of life, property and liberty of people is the
main goal of the modern constitutionalism. This makes all the three
organs of the state to be accountable to citizens being confined to their
respective limits according to the theory of separation of powers. In
order to implement this, there is the need of promulgation of
constitution and making of laws. Implementation of law is much more
important
enactment.
journey
towards
constitutionalism is not possible unless reforming the old and
inadequate laws having accommodated the new concepts of
jurisprudence developed as per the need of time and in international
level. Reform in existing law is necessary also to institutionalize
political context changed in the country over the last few years.
Having realized the same fact, Government of Nepal has initiated this
effort of reforming civil and criminal laws of the country. Government
of Nepal had formed two taskforces on civil law and criminal law
reform under the convenership of two Justices of the Supreme Court
namely Hon’ble Mr. Khilaraj Regmi and Hon’ble Mr. Kalyan Shrestha
respectively. The Penal Code and Criminal Procedures Code has
already been published and the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code
is on your hand.
Civil law is one of the major charters of relationship among citizens
and between the state and citizen. The family relationship between
persons; property and various aspects associated with it; civil rights;
matters relating to trade and commerce; relationship between person
and state and the procedures to implement those provisions have been
dealt with in the separate drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code. The Civil Procedures Code has been drafted taking
into account of the problems being faced in court procedures and
acknowledging the development taken place in the area of information
technology. An effort has been made in the proposed codes to
modernize the provisions of civil law within and out side the Country
Code.
Finally, I would like to offer my heartfelt thanks to the convener and
members of the Taskforce for their hard works during days and nights
to complete this task. I would also like to express special gratitude to
the JICA and the Japanese Professors for the contribution they have
made. I also would like to thank the Enhancing Access to Justice
Project and its staff for facilitating the Taskforce to complete its task
as the Secretariat.
(Dr. Ramkrishna Timelsena)
National Program Director
Right Hon’ble Prime Minister,
Office of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers,
Singhdurbar, Kathmandu.
Subject Submission of Report
Right Hon’ble Sir,
We do hereby submit the draft of the Civil Code, Civil Procedures Code and
report thereof prepared by the civil law Reform and Modification Task Force as
follows formed by a decision of Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers)
dated December 3, 2008 for reform and modification of civil law of Nepal.
Hon’ble Justice Mr. Khilraj Regmi, Justice, Supreme Court
Convener
Mr. Hari Prasad Neupane, Vice-Chairperson, Nepal Law
Commission
Member
Mr. Madhab Paudel, Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice
Member
Dr. Ram Krishna Timalsena, Registrar, Supreme Court
Member
Mr. Shyam Prasad Kharel, Senior Advocate,
Member
Mr. Ramnath Mainali, Advocate, Representative, Nepal Bar
Association
Member
Ms. Liladevi Gadtaula, Under Secretary (law), Ministry of
Energy
Woman
member
Mr. Kamalshali Ghimire, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law
and Justice
Membersecretary
The report submitted on this Wednesday, 11th August, 2010.
1. Background:
1.1 Need of Civil Code:
The Muluki Ain enacted for the first time in Nepal in the year
1853 for making provisions of civil law was mainly based on the
Hindu religion and philosophy. The Muluki Ain was amended
from time to time and in the year 1963, a new Muluki Ain
(hereinafter referred to as the “Country Code” in this report)
was enacted. The existing Country Code comprises of
substantive as well as procedural provisions of civil and
criminal laws. Since this Country Code was enacted in special
historical context, it fails to respond to the remarkable
achievements and changes occurred in the open, liberal,
democratic system, economic liberalization, development of
information technology and industrialization in the 21st century.
As this Act could not fulfill the needs of the changed context,
the need for timely reform and codification of civil law was felt
realized long time back; however, the reform and codification
works could not be initiated for a long time.
In order for making new civil law by bringing timely reform in
the prevailing law, one task force was formed under the
convenorship of the then Law Secretary and a draft was
prepared and published. Since that draft was in the preliminary
stage, that draft could not become a law.
Though most of the subject-matters of the civil law prevailing in
the country at present are in the Country Code, however, it
could not have covered all matters of civil law. Some of the
matters of civil law are in use through the interpretation and
judicial principles laid down by of Supreme Court while some of
those matters are being governed by general principles of
jurisprudence. Therefore, in the present changed context, it is
highly necessary to modernize and codify the civil law covering
the matters identified to be reformed, the judicial principles laid
down by the Supreme Court and the values developed in Nepal
by our own practice, the civil law Reform and Improvement
Task Force (herein after referred to as the “Taskforce”) was
formed as follows under the convenorship of a Justice of
Supreme Court according to a decision of Government of Nepal
(Council of Ministers) dated December 3, 2008:-
1. Hon’ble Justice Mr. Khilraj Regmi, Justice,
Supreme Court
Convener
2. Mr. Hari Prasad Neupane, Vice-Chairperson,
Nepal Law Commission
Member
3. Mr. Madhab Paudel, Secretary, Ministry of
Law and Justice
Member
4. Dr.
Krishna
Timalsena,
Registrar,
Supreme Court
Member
5. Mr. Shyam Prasad Kharel, Senior Advocate,
Member
6. Mr.
Ramnath
Mainali,
Advocate,
Representative, Nepal Bar Association
Member
7. Ms. Liladevi Gadtaula, Under Secretary (law),
Ministry of Energy
Woman
member
8. Mr. Kamalshali Ghimire, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Law and Justice
Membersecretary
Terms of Reference of Taskforce:
The terms of reference of the Taskforce as fixed by Government
of Nepal (Council of Ministers) are as follows:-
To prepare separate drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code by making a timely revision and
reform, in consonance with the sprit of the Republic,
the existing socio-economic and cultural conditions
of the country, of the Civil Code published in 2002
by the Taskforce constituted by Government of
Nepal, and to submit the same to Government of
Nepal;
To determine as to the subjects to be dealt with in
the Civil Code and the subjects to be dealt with in
separate law out of the subjects of the civil law and
to give suggestions to Government of Nepal;
While preparing the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, to study on the practices in other
countries about them and to furnish other necessary
suggestions to enrich the Nepali civil law system;
The Taskforce to hold consultation with the
concerned officials of Government of Nepal,
national and foreign experts, lawyers, stakeholders
and civil society,
Before submitting its suggestions together with
report,
Taskforce
consultation
meetings on the drafts with stakeholders and civil
society at regional as well as national level;
The Taskforce may form a drafting sub-committee
under coordination of the Secretary at the Ministry
of Law and Justice and the drafting sub-committee
shall, according to the direction of the Taskforce,
submit the draft of Civil Code and Civil Procedures
Code to the task force;
The terms of the Taskforce shall not exceed one year
from the date of commencement of its works.
Tasks performed by the Taskforce
3.1 The Taskforce initiated its works from March 22, 2009.
The Taskforce had invited former Judge of Appellate Court Mr.
Bodhariraj Pandey as an expert of the civil law, Mr. Kedar
Paudel, Joint Secretary at the Ministry of Law and Justice as
the Support Manager and Mr. Keshav Prasad Dahal, the Project
Manager of the Access to Justice Project as the focal point of
the Taskforce. Similarly, in order to assist in drafting, the
Taskforce had invited Mr. Kailash Subedi and Mr. Bashudev
Neupane, the Under Secretaries duo at the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Since all the members of the Taskforce are the officials
associated with different service and profession, The Taskforce
had performed its tasks in additional time; the time before or
after office hour and on public holidays. The Taskforce has
prepared the drafts having intense discussions on each of the
topics and had decided the matters unanimously. The
Taskforce has its meetings convened for 103 times to complete
its works.
In the course of performing its works, technical cooperation
was made available by the Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA), Government of Japan. Under this assistance,
the Government of Japan had formed an advisory group
comprising of Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo of the Keio University,
Prof. Satoshi Minamikata of the Niigata University and Prof.
Dr. Hiroyuki Kihara of the Asia University to give feedback to
the Taskforce on civil laws and practices prevailing in Japan
and in other developed countries. Out of the members of the
advisory group, Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo studied the draft and
gave suggestions on the matters of general principles of civil
law, natural and legal persons, bankruptcy of natural person,
property law, and law of torts; Prof. Satoshi Minamikata on the
matters relating to family law and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki Kihara on
the matters relating to law of contract and obligation. Similarly,
Mr. Taro Morinaga, Lecturer at the Ministry of Justice of
Japan had studied and offered comparative analysis of the draft
and provided comments and feedback on the proposed
provisions contained in the draft on private international law.
The Taskforce had had video conferences and direct
discussions with the advisory group time and time and the draft
has been prepared in such a manner that is would be best
suitable and practical in our context.
3.2.The JICA had organized seminars on Civil Code and
related laws in August, 2010 and February 2011 for the
convener, members, support manager and other officers
engaged in the works. In those seminars, discussions were held
with the advisory team members on various provisions of the
Civil Code in reference with the Uniform Commercial Code,
UNDROIT
Principles
International
Commercial
Contracts, 2004 and Civil Code of Japan, 1896. The
suggestions given there have been incorporated in the draft
having considered their relevancy in Nepalese context.
3.3. In connection with preparing the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, preliminary drafts were prepared, massive
suggestions were solicited from stakeholders in order to
improve the drafts. For this purpose, regional seminars were
organized in various geographical regions of the country and
intensive discussions were held on the drafts. For soliciting
suggestions on the preliminary draft of the Civil Code,
seminars were held in Nepalgunj, Janakpur, Butwal and
Biratnagar. Similarly, on the draft of the Civil Procedures
Code, seminars were held in Hetauda and Pokhara. In those
seminars, the Appellate court judges, District court judges of
the concerned areas, lawyers, government lawyers, court
employees, human rights activists and employees engaged in
quasi-judicial bodies, stakeholders and civil society members.
Similarly, two national-level consultative meetings were held
in Kathmandu on the drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code. In the said consultative meetings, Justices of
the Supreme Court, Attorney General, Appellate court judges,
District court judges in the Kathmandu valley, officials of
Nepal Bar Association, senior advocates and advocates, former
judges, government attorneys, Ministry of Law and Justice
officials, NGOs representatives, human rights activists and
staffs engaged in quasi-judicial authorities. Two professors
from Japan, Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki
Kihara also participated in the national consultative meetings.
Final shape has been given to the drafts of the Civil Code and
Civil Procedures Code having included the suggestions and
feedbacks received from the regional and national consultative
meetings. The final drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code have been incorporated in Annex-1 and
Annex-2 respectively.
The speech delivered by Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo has been given
in Annex-3.
Reasons for Reforming civil law:
Legal system of Nepal, particularly, civil law system of Nepal is
in very primitive stage. The principles in the field of civil law
developed in other countries could not have got any space in
Nepal law. There have been significant changes in political and
social sectors in Nepal, but the scattered civil law provisions
could not have addressed the needs of changes and open market
economy. On the one hand, civil law of the country is scattered
in a traditional manner while on the other, so many of the legal
provisions are not complete in themselves. As a result, so many
of the important principles, values and provisions of civil law
are confined only as the matters of academic discourse in our
legal system.
civil law is the backbone of strengthening of an open, liberal
and market-oriented economy. It cannot be forgotten that in
developed countries, civil law has promoted market economy.
As the society has been moving towards modernity from
traditional system, it is necessary to codify and modernize civil
law accordingly. Because of the liberal economic system the
country has adopted, it is the high time for us to modernize and
reform civil law also to respond to the needs of collaboration
and transactions with other countries. Nepal has to start the
journey of codification of laws having regard to the facts that
the countries which were not in favour of codification
traditionally have codifying their laws. It is in this background
that Government of Nepal has pursued the policy of reforming
civil law of Nepal by enacting Civil Code and Civil Procedures
Code.
Codification of law means inclusion in a single legislation the
legal principles, values and provisions in a particular area (such
as civil, criminal law and so on) in a well-managed order and to
enforce them. From the process of codification, not only the
laws will be codified, they will be simple, easily understandable
and logical and it would contribute in making a complete law.
With reference to civil law, codification is required for the
following reasons:-
(1) Since civil law is the charter of civic relationship in
any society and since it has the ownership of citizen, it
is desirable to have included all general principles of
civil law in one Code to the extent possible;
(2) Civil law contributes in development of jurisprudence
of the nation which enriches national law, thus, it is
necessary to have separate Code on civil matters;
(3) Not only the making of Civil Code will modernize our
legal system, it will also respond to the open market
policies adopted by other countries, thus, Civil Code is
required;
(4) Civil Code could be developed as a means of
promoting national integrity as having a uniform Civil
Code and to enforce it would be effective bedrock for
consolidating national unity.
Purposes of the Civil Code:
Making of and amendment to law is an inseparable part of social
development process. The Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code
have to be taken as tools of promoting national integration, as
means
developing
Nepalese
jurisprudence,
cornerstones of modernization of law in Nepal. Since civil law
uses to have a very close relationship with living style of every
citizen of a country, this is called as the citizen’s charter and it
is one of the major tools of solving day-to-day problems of
people in general. It is believed that the proposed Codes, which
have been prepared with inclusion of scattered principles and
provisions of civil laws along with those not yet developed in
the country, would play a significant role in responding to the
ever increasing needs of managing legal relationships in society
thereby massively managing civic obligation and protecting
rights and interests of general people.
Proposed
legal
provisions,
their
bases
drafting
methodology of the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code:
6.1 The prevailing Country Code and other laws on relevant
subjects have been taken as the main bases of the proposed Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code. The legal principles the
country has practiced over the last one hundred and fifty years
in the area of civil law have been given room in both of the
Codes either as they are or in their improved forms. Necessary
provisions of civil law have been proposed in both Codes having
regard to our geographical, ethnic, religious and cultural
diversity. Also an effort has been made to include the principles
and precedents laid down and by the Supreme Court from time
to time and being recognized and used in the field of civil law
like legal provisions. The legal principles recognized in the
jurisprudence of the country but having no legal provisions to
backup them (such as principles relating to persons) are
responded to along with concepts and required legal provisions.
Similarly, the concepts which have been clearly recognized in
our laws but not in practice (such as trusts or Guthee) have been
proposed as new legal provisions with timely changes and
reforms.
6.2 While preparing the proposed Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, Civil Codes in various countries have also
been studied. Since the codification of civil law is mainly the
product of continental legal system, the Taskforce has taken
into account of the Codes prevailing in the countries which have
been adopting the same legal system such as France, Germany,
Japan, the Philippines and Quebec province in Canada. However,
the provisions contained in those Codes could not be borrowed
and implemented as such having regard to special social,
economic and cultural traditions in our country. Despite of this
fact, in Nepal, there is the lack of so many of significant civil
law provisions prevailing and practiced in countries having the
history of codification for the last two hundred years (such as
France) and if such provisions could be introduced in our
country with special reference of our context, it would enrich
our legal system. Therefore, some of such provisions have been
proposed.
6.3 Some of the legal principles of civil law which have been in
practice in Nepal without any written and elaborative legal
provisions to back them have been given space in the Civil Code
and elaborated. Such provisions includes provisions relating to
maternal and paternal authority, guardianship, curatorship,
leasing contracts, hire and purchase contracts, servitude which
are in seldom use in Nepal without adequate legal provisions
and having regard to the same, provisions have been made in
detail in the Civil Code to provide adequate backup for them.
Until now, the matters relating to inter-country adoption are
being governed by the Country Code Chapter on Adoption and
the Terms and Procedures framed by Government of Nepal,
under the powers made in the Country Code. Having regard to
this fact, the provisions concerning inter-country adoption have
to be made as part of substantial law in the proposed Civil Code
specially in the context where Nepal is going to be a party to the
Hague Convention on Inter-Country Adoption. In addition to
this, an effort has been made to include in these Codes the
provisions made in the treaties to which Nepal is a party
(specially related to human rights) in such a manner that they
may not be inconsistent with the provisions hade in such human
rights instruments. Since the country does not have any
provision concerning private international law, an effort has also
been made in the Civil Code to incorporate within it some of the
provisions relating to private international law. Moreover, some
of the fundamental principles of civil law which have been
introduced and in practice in other countries but not provided
for in law of Nepal (such as usufruct, testamentary will and
other will, parents and children relationship, unjust enrichment
and so on) have been dealt with in separate Chapter each.
6.4 So far as the Civil Procedures Code is concerned, the
proposed draft contains the procedures of civil cases prevailing
in the country in a logical order. However, an effort has been
made to reform the existing lengthy and cumbersome procedures
of litigation process and to make them timely and it is expected
that the proposed Code will substantially improve the court
procedures and hearing of cases. From the procedural point of
view, some new provisions have been introduced in the Code
about which detail elaboration has been made in Paragraph 8
below.
6.5 While drafting the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code,
our existing drafting style and methodology based on common
law system have been followed. Separate matters of civil law
have been presented in separate chapters treating each of them
as a branch of civil law. The chapters have been chosen based
on the need of each of the subject-matters. In each of the
chapters, sections and sub-sections have been given as may be
necessary.
Contents of the Civil Code:
Though the Taskforce has taken the preliminary draft of
the Civil Code prepared in 2006 as its basis of works at the time
of commencement of its business, the contents of the Civil Code
has been designed also having regard to the laws, practices and
experiences of other countries as well. The proposed Code
consists of following subject-matters in the following six parts,
52 chapters and 751 sections. If the Code is passed by the
Legislature-Parliament and authenticated in its present form, it
is sure that it will be the longest ever Act in the country. It is
contextual to share here that in other countries as well (such as
France, Germany, Japan, the Philippines and Cubec province in
Canada), Civil Code is used to be the longest law.

Part-1
Preliminary (divided in three chapters and 29
sections)

Part-2
Laws Concerning Persons (divided in three
chapters and 22 sections)

Part-3
Family Law (divided in 12 chapters and 218
sections)

Part-4
Property Law (divided in 15 chapters and 251
sections)

Part-5
Concerning
contract
other
obligations (divided in 18 chapters and 200
sections)

Part-6
Private International Law (one Chapter and 31
sections)
In the first part of the Civil Code, the subjects such as
preliminary provisions, general principles of civil law, and
civil rights have been proposed. The provisions of this
Code have been treated as general law and it is provided
that if there is any special law on any specific subjectmatter, the provisions of the special law shall prevail on
such matters and this Code will not affect on such
provisions. Like general principles of criminal justice in
jurisprudence, the universally accepted principles of civil
law and principles determined by the Supreme Court in
Nepal have been dealt with in a separate Chapter as
general principles of civil law. This Chapter deals with the
some prevailing general principles of civil law such as
ignorance of law not to be an excuse, wrongdoer to bear
damages, no benefit out of wrongdoing, civil liability not
to be exempted and act against law to be invalid. Under
the Chapter on civil rights in this part, provisions such as
prohibition in discrimination, special measures not to be
taken as discrimination, inviolability of right to privacy
have been made in addition to new provision that if any
one has violated a civil right of anyone and has caused
loss or if some one is about to violate such right, the
aggrieved party may submit a petition to District court as
well in addition to Appellate court and the concerned court
may issue preventive or directive order as it may deem
necessary. There was a long debate among members of the
Taskforce as to whether or not to have the separate
Chapter for civil rights and finally, it was settled by
consensus based on the practice of some of the countries
that it be dealt with as a separate Chapter.
The second part of the Civil Code deals with legal
provisions relating to persons. There are three chapters in
this part viz. natural person, legal person and bankruptcy
of a natural person. Though law of person is not new in
the Nepalese jurisprudence, however, the Code for the first
time has proposed separate provisions as laws of person.
The legal capacity of natural persons has been classified in
three stages as full legal capacity, partial legal capacity
and incapacity. Though unsoundness of mind has been
frequently used in our legal context, no provisions have
been made with regard to its definition and legal status.
Under the provisions relating to legal person, new
provisions have been proposed such as the conditions in
which a legal person acquires legal capacity, the works
legal person is capable of doing, provisions relating to
some entities that acquire legal personality on its own,
operation and management of legal persons, and directors
of legal persons not to take decisions on matters having
conflict with their interests. Since there is separate
Insolvency Act, 2006 in force with regard to corporate
insolvency, this part deals only with bankruptcy of natural
person alone.
The third part of the Code comprises of different chapters
on provisions relating to family law. The principles of
civil nature elaborated in the Chapters on Marriage and on
Husband and Wife of the existing Country Code have been
proposed in this part as three chapters viz. Marriage,
Effects of Marriage and Divorce. Other provisions
proposed in this part includes provisions on Relationship
between parents and children; maternal and parental
authority; guardianship; curatorship; domestic adoption
inter-country adoption; partition of property; testamentary
will and succession. Though some of the provisions
proposed in the Code are prevailing at present, however,
those provisions are not timely and having regard to
directive orders issued by the Supreme Court on marriage
and divorce, effort has been made to reform and improve
those provisions with a view to maintain gender equality.
The current provisions of registering marriage at Office of
Local Registrar and District Administration Office have
been changed and new provision of registering marriage at
District Court has been proposed considering the
prevailing international practices as well. Under the
Chapter on relationship between parents and children, new
provision of claiming of child within two years of the birth
has been proposed. In the Chapter on legal capacity,
priority order of the persons to be a guardian of the quasicompetent person has been stated and new provision of
conferring guardianship to the organization that is taking
custody of children. In the Chapter on curatorship,
provision have been proposed that in case there is no
guardian of any person, any one can be appointed as
his/her curator and curator may hold and take care of
property of such a person.
The traditional provisions relating to adoption in Nepal are
associated with Hindu principles and property though
there are significant changes going on in practice. Because
of influence of Hindu law, there is a provision that no
person having a son may adopt a son and no person having
a daughter may adopt a daughter. This traditional approach
to adoption has been changed and it is proposed that if the
concerned person is financially capable, a court may allow
him/her to adopt a son even if he/she is having a son or
daughter even if he/she is having a daughter. This
provision has been proposed because the absolute
traditional provision of prohibiting adoption of a son if
one is having a son and of a daughter if one is having a
daughter may not be relevant in the present context.
Similarly, the present provision of getting the deed of
adoption registered at Land Revenue Office like any deed
of property transaction has been proposed to be changed
and it is proposed that such deed has to be certified from
District Court as it is a matter relating to legal capacity of
person rather than a property transaction. In addition, a
new provision has been proposed that if the separated
husband and wife start to live together again, the son or
daughter adopted earlier by either of them shall belong to
both of them. Normally, age of the person adopted as son
or daughter should be below the age of fourteen years,
however, it is proposed as new provision that within the
relationship of three generations, the said age bar is not
applicable so that even the matured person of old age
could become an adopted son or adopted daughter. Since
Nepal is a signatory to the Hague Convention on
Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of
Inter-country Adoption concluded in 1993 and the country
is in the process of being a party to it, it is necessary to
separate
Chapter
Inter-country
Adoption,
therefore, some necessary provisions have been made in
consistence with the convention.
In so many countries in the world, there is no provision of
partition of family property and the owner of property may
transfer the property to the person he/she wills. However,
having regard to Nepal’s economic, social and cultural
aspects, the existing provisions of partition of parental
property is left continued. However, this provision leads
the children to remain dependent to paternal property. This
law is in practice in Nepal for centuries and it is seen to be
a natural right of children. Thus, it is not possible for the
time being to introduce the will system substituting the
partition of property. Rather, it is proposed that the will
system be introduced after the interval of certain time, i.e
from the 1st of Baisakh, 2080 (corresponding to April 13,
2023) replacing the current partition of property system.
Since the provision of taking costs for life maintenance
(jiuni) and expenses for marriage seem to be irrelevant and
impracticable, it is proposed to repeal such provisions.
The fourth part of the Code deals with law of property
which contains 15 chapters and such as provisions as to
ownership of property, possession, definition and use of
government,
public
private
property
provisions which are in practice in Nepal either directly or
indirectly but not being recognized conceptually such as
usufruct, servitude, land cultivation and prescription,
house rent, trusts, acquisition and transfer of property,
mortgage of immovable property, registration of deeds,
donation, and financial transaction have been proposed.
On the one hand, this Chapter integrates and brings timely
changes in the related legal provisions prevailing in the
existing Country Code, the Land Revenue Act, 1977 and
the Land Survey and Measurement Act, 1963 while on the
other, the new concepts such as usufruct and servitude
have been proposed to be introduced in the Nepalese legal
system to enrich our legal system.
Under the provisions of property, definitions of movable,
immovable, personal, common, and joint ownership
property have been given and according to principles laid
down by the Supreme Court, new provision to regard the
property personally earned by father and mother as the
common property of the family has been added. Under
government, public and private property, additional
provisions as to definition, use and protection of such
property have been made. According to the newly emerged
concept of property in the process of social development,
the concept of community property has been proposed.
Provision of trust to allow property in one’s ownership
and possession to be managed and operated for the
benefits of the beneficiaries has been proposed. The
current practice of trusts is proposed to be continued under
the law of trust of common law system.
The fifth part of the Code consists of proposed provisions
relating to contracts and other obligations. Divided in
eighteen chapters, this part includes law relating to general
provisions relating to obligation, conditions for formation
of contracts, validity of contracts, performance of
contracts, breach and remedies for breach of contracts,
sales of goods contracts, contracts of guarantee, bailment
contracts, contracts of mortgage and collateral security,
agency contracts, transport of goods contracts, lease
contracts, hire purchase contracts, indirect and quasicontracts, unjust enrichment, torts, defective products
liability, and works and wages. In this part, on the one
hand, the existing laws on contract have been consolidated
and inadequate provisions have been improved while on
the other, new concepts in our context such as unjust
enrichment, torts, defective products liability have been
incorporated. Mainly, the law of contracts has been
improved according to some of the provisions of
UNDROIT
Principles
International
Commercial
Contracts, 2004 and Uniform Commercial Code. It could
be a matter of further debate in the future whether or not a
separate commercial Code will be required once the Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code are in enforcement. So
many of the countries such as France, Spain, Switzerland,
Japan are having separate commercial Code while there is
only one civil and commercial Code in the Netherlands.
The Chapter on lease investment which is in the
preliminary stage of draft has been excluded from this
Code and it is recommended to incorporate it in
commercial Code or to enact a separate law for it.
The Chapter 6th of the Code comprises provisions relating
to private international law. The private international law
mainly deals with conflicts of law and such disputes are
mainly related to civil law matters. As this concept is law
is at the infancy stage in Nepal, it is proposed to
incorporate such provisions in a separate Chapter in the
Civil Code.
The New Legal Principles proposed in the Civil Code and its
bases and causes:
The following new provisions introduced in the existing civil
law and those improved in the existing law are as follows:-
New Provision to Presumption of Death of a Person:
As the current law provision (Section 32 of the Evidence
Act, 1974) of regarding the person disappeared for the last
twelve years without notice to be dead normally seems to
be appropriate, it is proposed to be continued. However, if
this twelve years clause is made applicable even with
regard to the extremely old person or a person deputed to a
war zone or person met with an accident, it would be not
rational. Thus, the Taskforce has proposed new provision
in this regard having studied such provisions in other
countries. Since the average maximum age of a person is
not more than 100 years, it would not be appropriate to
presume that if a person of 95 years disappears, he/she
would be presumed to be dead only after 12 years.
Similarly, if there is a clear evidence that a person is
deputed to a war zone or he/she has met with an accident,
it would not be appropriate to presume such person to be
dead only after a long period of 12 years. Therefore, new
provision has been proposed that if no normal information
is received with regard to a disappeared person who is of
80 years or more or who is deputed to a war zone or who
has met with an accident is not surviving for a period of
five years, four years and three years respectively, the
person so disappeared will be presumed to be dead.
Detail provision as to legal person:
Though the concept of legal person is not new in
jurisprudence, there is no provision in general law as to
the status of legal person. With regard to legal person, a
new Chapter has been made providing that legal
personality will be acquired only after getting registered
with a competent authority and after registration; such
person will acquire corporate personality. In addition,
matters as to acquisition and exercise of rights by such
authorities, decision-making authority within them and
consequences of their dissolution have also been made in
the proposed Code.
New Concept in Bankruptcy law:
According to the prevailing law on bankruptcy, it is not
clear how long will the status of bankruptcy of a person
declared to be bankrupt last. Since this non-clarity it must
be supposed that a person declared to be bankrupt would
remain bankrupt for an indefinite period of time. However,
as this provision is not appropriate from the human right
point of view as well, it requires a fresh look for reform.
Thus, it has been proposed that a person declared to be
bankrupt from a court will last for a period of 12 years and
after that period, he/she would be treated as if he/she is
not declared bankrupt.
New provision in family law:
Some new dimension in family law have been proposed in
the Nepali jurisprudence. According to the proposed
provision, marriage registration is being gradually made
mandatory, new provision as to relationship between
father, mother and children, paternal and maternal
authority, and provision relating to guardianship and
curatorship. Though these concepts are not new in
Nepalese society, the legal provisions as such are new.
Provisions concerning testamentary will:
The provision of will of one’s own title or ownership is
not new concept in the Nepalese law. The deed of will
with immediate effect (halaiko bakas patra) or deed of
will to be effective after death (sheshpachhiko bakas
patra) are the mechanism by which the system of will is
being practiced to some extent. However, so long as the
present provision of partition of parental property
continues, deed of will with immediate effect or deed of
will to be effective after death could be implemented
subject to the partition of property. So far as the question
of provision relating to will system is concerned, parental
property or property acquired by a person has to be
disposed of after death of such person according to the
deed of will he/she has executed.
According to traditional concept of will, if it is proved that
a person has executed a deed of will; formal procedures
concerning it are of least significance. However, in the
present time when honesty and moral values are decaying,
it would not be prudent to leave the execution of deed of
will open. Therefore, it is proposed that such a deed of
will has to be certified by certain authority for its
authenticity purpose, and for that Land Revenue Office,
Embassy or Consulate general in abroad or a notary public
are proposed as the entities to certify the execution of such
deeds.
Provisions concerning Usufruct:
The provision of getting benefit or advantage from
somebody
else’s
property
without
transferring
ownership of such property is one of the major aspects of
civil law and it is being practiced to some extent in Nepal
as well. However, as there is no legal and institutional
arrangement made in Nepali jurisprudence in this regard,
legal provision concerning usufruct has been proposed.
From this provision, movable or immovable property will
be mobilized to the optimum extent that accelerates
economic activities. Thus, this concept has special
importance in a market economy. From provision of
usufruct, any person may handover property under his/her
title and ownership to any one else for certain period for
prescription. It is the expectation of the Taskforce that it
will accelerate economic activities by way of optimum
mobilization of property.
Provisions concerning servitude:
Concept of servitude with reference to use of private
property is not new in Nepalese society, though its use has
been very narrowly confined. This does not cover the
whole concept of servitude or easement prevailing in other
countries. Having regard to the sane fact, the Taskforce
has proposed to include in Nepali jurisprudence the
concept of servitude in the use or prescription of
immovable property and has proposed a separate Chapter
for its practical use.
Hire purchase contract and lease contracts:
Though the Contract Act, 1999 had given a new dimension
to the literature of Nepali law with regard to general and
special provisions of contract, it could not have covered
within it hire purchase contract and lease contract. Hire
purchase contract is one of the major means of market
economy under which the goods sold by a seller to the
buyer is, until full payment of the goods so sold is paid,
deemed to be let to the buyer by the seller and ownership
of the goods will be transferred to the buyer once the full
price of the goods is paid. Though this provision is not
there in the Nepali law, it is being governed by general
previsions made in contract. Thus, a new Chapter has been
proposed for this purpose.
So far as provision of lease contract is concerned, this is
letting immovable property for a long time and which is
different from house rent.
Provisions concerning torts:
Though there is no separate law of torts in Nepal, however,
it is not the case that there was no use of tortuous liability
in Nepal. Requirement of payment of damages for loss of
crops by cattle (bali armal) is one of such example.
Nonetheless, there has been on formal use of the word tort
in any Nepal law. Duskriti may not be the actual
translation of the English word “tort.” Nevertheless, this
word has been in the use in the Nepali legal field, the
Taskforce has used the word Duscriti in its original form.
8.10 Provisions concerning Private International Law:
Though transactions and relationship of Nepal and Nepali
people with foreign counties and foreign citizens and
corporate bodies on various subjects of civil nature are on
the rise, there are no provisions relating to private
international law in the Nepal law to regulate such
matters; therefore, a separate Chapter has been proposed
in Part 6 of the proposed Civil Code. Though the proposed
provisions could not respond to all the subjects of private
international law prevailing in international practice, basic
essential principles have been proposed in this Chapter.
One question may be raised as to need of incorporation of
provisions of private international law in the Civil Code
itself. This is one important and relevant question of
codification of law. There is no uniformity in other
countries having codification of civil law. However, as the
Civil Codes of Italy, of Russian Federation, of Vietnam
and of the Quebec province of Canada are having a
separate Chapter on private international law, it is felt
appropriate to incorporate it in the proposed Civil Code.
Civil Procedures Code:
The Civil Procedures Code determined the procedures to be
followed for settlement of disputes of civil nature and it none of
the significant aspects of civil law administration. Even in the
countries not having separate Civil Code (such as India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan) were having Civil Procedures Code since
1908 and the need was felt in Nepal as well long time back.
Though efforts were made in the past also to draft Civil
Procedures Code, there was no publication of an integrated draft
prepared and published. Thus, it has to be taken as the first step
in this regard. The proposed Code consists of 23 chapters, 290
sections and 30 schedules, the details of which are as follows:-

Chapter-1
Preliminary
3 sections

Chapter-2
General principles of Civil Procedures
12 sections

Chapter-3
Provisions concerning Jurisdiction
12 sections

Chapter-4
Provisions
concerning
procedures
preparation of documents
19 sections

Chapter-5
Provisions concerning limitation
16 sections

Chapter-6
Provisions concerning court fees
22 sections

Chapter-7
Provisions concerning statement of claims
and claims
14 sections

Chapter-8
Provisions
concerning
summons
service of summons
20 sections

Chapter-9
Provisions concerning statement of defense
and counter claims
7 sections

Chapter-10
Provisions concerning endorsement
5 sections

Chapter-11
Provisions concerning preliminary hearing
4 sections

Chapter-12
Provisions concerning date for appearing in
courts
14 sections

Chapter-13
Provisions concerning power of attorneys
12 sections

Chapter-14
Provisions
concerning
interlocutory
interim order
5 sections

Chapter-15
Provisions
concerning
examination
documentary evidences
18 sections

Chapter-16
Provisions
concerning
examination
witnesses
11 sections

Chapter-17
Provisions concerning hearing of cases and
judgment
11 sections

Chapter-18
Suspension and transfer of cases
4 sections

Chapter-19
Provisions concerning appeal
14 sections

Chapter-20
Provisions concerning review and revision
3 sections

Chapter-21
Provisions
concerning
mutual
legal
assistance
16 sections

Chapter-22
Execution of judgments
25 sections

Chapter-23
Miscellaneous provisions
23 sections
Mainly, the current draft has accommodated the procedures of civil
nature in the Country Code with necessary modification and reform
and in so many subjects, procedural provisions have been made in
order to make proceedings and settlement of civil cases simple,
transparent, predictable and more practical. The main provisions
proposed in this Code and the rationale behind them are as follows:-
Coverage of procedures:
The proposed procedures code has been designed in such a way
that both judicial and quasi-judicial authorities to try cases of
civil nature may invoke it. Accordingly, the words like court and
judge have been defined.
Nature of the Code:
This procedures code has been proposed as General Code of
procedures. If there is a separate civil procedures are provided
in the prevailing law, it shall be according to that law and in
other matters it shall be according to this Code.
Clear demarcation of civil and criminal cases:
Though No. 9 of the existing Country Code has classified civil
and criminal cases, its use has raised some non-clarity in
practice and some of the civil nature cases are being registered
in criminal record. Clear demarcation has been made to end this
anomaly. This would end the current trend of registering civil
nature cases such as divorce in the criminal record.
General principles of civil procedures
In Chapter 2 of the proposed Code, some of the general
principles of civil procedures have been identified and
mandatory provision of compliance of these principles in the
proceedings of cases of civil nature by judicial and quasijudicial authorities. It has been expected that these provisions
will facilitate even the quasi-judicial bodies to hear and decide
cases.
Most of the principles elaborated here are, normally, in our
practice but some of them are new provisions proposed. Among
the proposed principles, all parties to a dispute in a court
including Government of Nepal have to be treated equally and
they will have the same capacity. However, if a separate law has
afforded special treatment or discount to Government of Nepal
or any other person (such as in case of court fee, locus standi
and so on), it shall be accordingly. Similarly, it is proposed that
a civil case may be compromised at any stage or any court and
that one level appeal is a matter of right.
Court fee
The procedures code includes provision to clarify jurisdiction,
limitation
court
which
vital
subjects
administration of justice. The provision made in the existing
Court Fees Act, 1960 have been modified according to necessity
and the English words used in the Act have been converted into
Nepali language as Adalati shulka.
New provision of counter claim and defendant:
The existing scattered provisions relating to statement of claims
and statement of defense have been included in one Act and
proposed to make them simple. In addition, the following new
previsions are also made:-
(a) The current law of filing another statement of claims to
make any new claims while filing statement of defense
against the claim made in the statement of claims has
been modified and it is proposed as new provision that
counter-claims may be made in the statement of defense
itself. In such situation, the defendant must pay court fee
according to the amount claimed in such counter-claims.
(b) Though there is legal provision at present in No. 139 of
the Chapter on Court Proceedings, the Country Code that
a court may hear the person who is not made as party to a
case but who has been implicated in the case or
compliant and he/she may be made a party to the case.
But a person who is not implicated in case could not be
made a party. This law is proposed to be changed and
propose that though not implicated in a case, if right,
interests, claim or concern of a person are related in a
case, if the concerned person makes a request for it if the
court finds it appropriate, such a person may be made as
a party to such a case.
Provisions concerning preliminary hearing
According to the existing law, even if the defendant has made
claims that the plaintiff has no locus standi, that the statement of
claims is not filed within the limitation, or that the court in
which the case has been filed has no jurisdiction to try such a
case, these preliminary questions are not settled first and the
case-proceedings go on and finally, the cases are decided based
on these preliminary cases after so many years. If such
provisions are not improved, effectiveness of court proceedings
may be questioned and it would promote vexatious litigation. In
order to reform this situation, it is proposed that court must
settle this question before examining evidences and preliminary
hearing should be conducted for that purpose. It is proposed that
through preliminary hearing, the statement of claims will be
dismissed if there is no jurisdiction, locus standi or limitation.
provisions
concerning
submitting
statement of claims and service of summons:
In the proposed Code, the existing provisions with regard to
service of summons have been continued with necessary
modifications. The proposed new provision in this regard is that
if the plaintiff himself/herself desires to deliver the statement of
claims along with summons of the court, he/she may deliver
them and in the case of legal persons, the plaintiff
himself/herself has to deliver the summons. Since this provision
has been already introduced in the Arbitration Act, 1999, it
could be made applicable to all suits of civil nature. Moreover,
it is also proposed that the summon in name of the officials,
legal practitioners, witnesses, power of attorneys who appear in
the court or a party which is engaged in litigation in the same
court may be delivered to him/her at the time of his/her presence
at the court and in case he/she denies in the delivery, the judge
may prohibit him/her in other proceedings in the court.
Reform in getting extension of elapsed time limit or due
The existing provision made in No. 59 of the Chapter on Court
Proceedings, the Country Code provides that the elapsed timelimit may be extended for three times not exceeding 30 days in
total. It is causing delay in hearing and settlement of cases. The
existing provision was made in the specific context of lacking
communication and transportation facilities in the distant past
and as there has been remarkable progress in communication
and transport, the provision of extension of time limit for three
times not exceeding 30 days in total is not justifiable. As this
provision requires a review, it is proposed that time-limit may
be expanded up to a period of 21 days for two times only.
9.10 Use of video conference may be allowed:
It is proposed in the procedures code that in case a party submits
an application requesting to examine a witness who could not
appear at the court for any special reason through video
conference, the witness examination may be conducted through
video conference.
9.11 Provisions concerning mutual legal assistance:
Though No. 34 of the Chapter on Court Proceedings, the
Country Code provides that service in abroad of summons,
notice or closed-questions issued by courts of Nepal and service
in Nepal of summons, notice or closed-questions issued by a
foreign court shall be according to Rules made by Government
of Nepal, however, no such Rules could have been framed so far,
and that particular Number has not been implemented. Since
Nepal’s transactions with foreign countries is on the rise day-byday and since a large number of Nepali people have been living
abroad, it is necessary to have legal provisions for service of
summons used by courts in Nepal in abroad, witnesses to be
examined and judgments delivered in abroad to be executed in
Nepal, therefore, some legal provisions have been made for the
same purpose.
proposed
provisions
based
following
conventions:-
The Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial
and Extra-Judicial Documents in Civil and Commercial
Matters, 1965
The Hague Convention on the Tasting and Evidence
Abroad in Civil and Commercial Matters, 1970
Hague
Convention
Recognition
Enforcement
Foreign
Judgments
Civil
Commercial Matters, 1971
9.12 Speedy execution of judgment
Execution of judgment is one of the crucial aspects of
administration of justice. Judgments of courts will be
meaningless if they are not enforced on time. Unless and until
judgments are enforced in a simple and easy manner, people in
general could not feel to get justice. The ultimate realization of
effectiveness of a decision or final order of a court is possible
only through execution of judgment. As the Taskforce was of
the view that execution of judgment in simple, easy and speedy
manner itself is a realization of justice and the procedures
relating to execution of justice have to be dealt with in the Civil
Procedures, the Taskforce has prepared the draft taking into
special account of creation of machinery for execution of
judgments. In order to execute judgments in simple, easy and
speedy manner, it is proposed that after preparation of judgment,
the court should send the record thereof to the Judgment
Execution Section immediately and a separate case-file and
record of judgment has to be sent to the concerned District
Court for execution.
In order to avoid delay in execution of judgment after the
verdict and in order to execute judgment by way of compromise
or reconciliation, new procedures have been proposed so that
parties to a case may get the judgment executed by making a
joint petition to the court for that purpose.
9.13 Procedures for partition of property
The current No. 46 of the Chapter on Partition, the Country
Code, provides that a petition shall be filed within three years
from the date of decision for partition of property. There is no
limitation fixed to file a suit for partition of property. However,
in case of effecting the partition, a long period of three years is
prescribed. The Supreme Court has also interpreted that if no
petition is filed within the said time, partition need not be
effected.
Clause (4) of Article 20 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal
provides that a son and a daughter shall have equal right in
partition of property and a getting a share from partition of
family property has been accepted as one of the natural rights
and a right at birth. It is the view of the Taskforce that so long
as the provision of partition of family property continues, on one
should be deprived from a share of property through any
technical basis.
In the context of difficulties faced by courts in executing
judgments in partition of property cases and having regard to the
increasing flow of such cases in courts, the Taskforce has
proposed that if the parties to a suit for partition of property are
on due date to appear at the court, the judgment shall be
executed within three months. If there are more than one coparceneres and one of the co-parceners does not present at the
court, a 15-day notice shall be sent to him/her and if all coparceners present, partition of property shall be effected then
and there.
Similarly, if not all co-parceners present at the court, it is
proposed that the court shall separate the share of partition
property of the person who is not present at the court. It is also
proposed that if the statement of property at the time of partition
is not exact, the value of the shortfall property shall be
determined and it shall be reimbursed from the property of the
person providing the share of property or the person taking
custody of the property.
9.14 Guardian may with permission of court file a case:
It is proposed that in order to protect rights of the person who is
a minor according to the law, old, blind or incapable of speaking,
or having unsound mind, the guardian may file a suit or submit
statement of defense, appeal or a petition on behalf of such a
person with an approval of the court. This would relieve courts
from unnecessary backlog of cases and people will get justice on
time.
Suggestions concerning policy and institutional reform to be
made in civil law:
Though necessary provisions have been proposed in the Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code for reform in the existing laws,
however, the following recommendations have been made for
strengthening civil law by effective implementation of the
proposed Codes:-
(1) As per the practice until now, the Nepal law has not
accepted the requirement of registration of marriage as a
mandatory act as provided in civil laws of other countries.
If the act of registration of marriage has to be left as a
voluntary act, the act of getting marriage concluded will
be a never-ending job. According to para (2) of Article 16
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 1979, to which Nepal is a
party, it is mandatory to register every marriage in a
register to be maintained for that purpose. In order to
implement this provision as well, registration of marriage
must be made mandatory in our country. Therefore, it is
proposed in the Code that in whatsoever manner may a
marriage be solemnized, such marriage has to be
registered in order to get legal validity. In order to fully
implement this provision, Government of Nepal should
raise public awareness massively through mass media and
local bodies and civil society should also develop the
marriage registration system as a necessary condition of
matrimonial life. It is the expectation of the Taskforce that
it would further promote the legal status of women. It is
also recommended to make necessary legal provision that
a non-registered marriage will not have legal validity by
being a party to the Convention on Consent to Marriage,
Minimum Age to Marriage and Registration of Marriage,
1965.
(2) The Chapter on lease investment which was in the Civil
Code published in 2006 has been excluded from the
proposed Code. It is the view of the Taskforce that time
has not been matured enough for the concept of lease
investment, which is distinct from day-to-day matter of
civic relationship, to be included in the civil law. However,
it is not the view of the Taskforce that there is no need of
lease investment law in the country. The Taskforce is of
the view that such a law must be incorporated in bank and
financial institutions law rather than in the Civil Code.
(3) According
suggestions
received
regional
consultation meetings held in various regions and national
consultation, the provisions concerning partition of
property have been reviewed and provisions to transfer
property through will system has been proposed. Though it
is easy to make laws relating to will, it is very difficult to
move society forward from the centuries old tradition of
sons and daughters to have rights in shares of family
property from father or husband through partition of
property. In a society like our where education is not wellavailable and opportunities of employment are very
minimal, it would be difficult for people to earn a means
of livelihood if a share of property is not received from
father or husband. Irrespective of that fact, it is necessary
to relieve society from the traditional principle of partition
of property and to allow people to dispose of their
property according to their will thereby changing the
traditional style of being dependent on paternal property.
This has to be started from a particular point of time. Thus,
the Taskforce has proposed that this system be introduced
with effect from the 1st of Baisakh, 2080 (corresponding to
April 13, 2023). To materialize this provision the state
should provide free and compulsory and vocational
education, create more and more opportunities of
employment, and make people to rely more on hard-work
and labour. We recommend to Government of Nepal to
take measures in this regard.
Once the two Codes are brought into force, it is sure that
new dimension will begin in Nepal but as the courts will
have extra functions to carry on (marriage registration,
appointment of guardians and curators and registration of
deeds of adoption), the existing number of staff of District
Court and budget will be insufficient. If there is no
efficient human resources in judiciary, it could hardly be
expected that even a good law may deliver good results.
Therefore, the existing staffing of courts must be reviewed,
judges and support staff must be trained and physical
capacity must be enhanced such as audio-visual aids.
As the current trends show, the condition of judgment
execution is not satisfactory. If judgments of courts are
not enforced on time, it will be meaningless. Unless and
until judgments are enforced in a simple and easy manner,
people in general could not feel to get justice. Taking into
account of this fact, this Code has proposed some new
procedures. In order to implement this provision in
practice, the Taskforce recommends Government of Nepal
to establish a mechanism comprising of experienced and
appropriate human resources.
It is already stated that civil law is a matter of concern and
interest for general people, it must be revised from time to
time. Law will be developed and people will feel
ownership of the policies adopted by the state only if civil
laws are reformed according to the policies adopted by the
state. Therefore, it is recommended to Government of
Nepal to form a Taskforce to review the whole civil law of
the country with a view to bringing timely changes in
them.
Civil law Reform and Modification Task Force, 2008
Contents

Part 1
Preliminary
Preamble

Chapter 1: Preliminary Statement

Chapter 2: General Principles of civil law

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Civil Rights

Part 2
Law of Persons

Chapter 1: Provisions Concerning Natural Person

Chapter 2: Provisions Concerning Legal Person

Chapter 3: Provisions concerning bankruptcy of a natural
person

Part 3
Family Law

Chapter 1: Provisions concerning Marriage

Chapter 2: Provisions concerning consequences of a
marriage

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Divorce

Chapter 4: Provisions concerning relation between the
parent and children

Chapter 5: Provision concerning Parental Authority

Chapter 6: Provision concerning Guardianship

Chapter 7: Provision concerning Curatorship

Chapter 8: Provision concerning adoption

Chapter 9: Provisions concerning inter-country adoption

Chapter 10: Provisions concerning partition of common
property

Chapter 11: Provisions concerning Succession

Part 4
Law of Property

Chapter 1: General Provisions Concerning Property
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Ownership
Possession

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Uses of Property

Chapter 4: Provisions Concerning Government, Public and
Community Properties

Chapter 5: Provisions Concerning Trust

Chapter 6: Provisions Concerning Usufruct

Chapter 7: Provisions Concerning Servitudes

Chapter 8: Provisions Concerning Cultivation and Use of

Chapter 9: Provisions Concerning House Rent

Chapter 10: Provisions Concerning Donation and Gift
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Transfer
Acquisition of Property

Chapter 12: Provisions Concerning Mortgage of Immovable
Property
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Pre-emption
Immovable Property

Chapter14: Provisions Concerning Registration of Deed

Chapter15: Provisions Concerning Transaction

Part 5
Law Concerning Contract and Obligation

Chapter 1: General Provisions Concerning Obligation

Chapter 2: Provisions Concerning Formation of a Contract

Chapter 3: Validity of Contract

Chapter 4: Provisions Concerning Performance of Contract

Chapter 5: Provisions Concerning Breach of Contract and
Remedies

Chapter 6: Provisions Concerning Sale of Goods Contract

Chapter 7: Provisions Concerning Guarantee

Chapter 8: Provisions Concerning Bailment Contracts

Chapter 9: Provisions Concerning Collateral or Deposit
Contracts

Chapter 10: Provisions Concerning Agency Contract
Chapter
Provisions
Contracts
Concerning
Transportation of Goods

Chapter 12: Provisions Concerning Lease Contract

Chapter 13: Provisions Concerning Hire Purchase Contract

Chapter 14: Provisions Concerning Payment of Wages

Chapter15: Provisions Concerning Indirect or Quasi Contract

Chapter 16: Provisions Concerning Unjust Enrichment

Chapter 17: Provisions Concerning Torts

Chapter 18: Provisions Concerning Liability for Defective
Products

Part -6
Provisions Concerning Private International Law
Annex-1
THE CIVIL

Part -1
PRELIMINARY
A BILL MADE TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE CIVIL LAWS
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to bring timely changes in
the civil law provisions in the Muluki Ain (the Country Code)
and other laws having amended and consolidated them in order
to maintain morality, decency, good conduct, convenience and
economic interest of general public by maintaining law and
order in the country and to maintain a cordial relationship
among different races, tribes or communities by providing for
just provisions in economic, social and cultural fields,
Now, therefore, the Constituent Assembly has enacted this Act
pursuant to clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution
of Nepal, 2007.

Chapter-1
Preliminary Statement
Short title and commencement: This Act may be cited as "the
Civil Code, 2010".

Chapter-11 of this Code shall come into force on
April 14, 2023 and the rest Chapters shall come into force from
the next day following the completion of one year on which it
was authenticated.
Definition: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires,
in this Code,-
"Court" means the Supreme Court, Appellate
Court and District Court and also includes any
other court, other judicial authority or official
empowered according to law to initiate
proceedings and to adjudicate any particular
type of civil cases.
"Law" means a law in force for the time being.
"Person" means a natural person and also
includes a legal person,
"Complaint" means a statement of claims and
the word also includes a complain, claim or
counter claim of any other type.
"Local body" means the Village Development
Committee or Municipality, as the case may be.
"Property" means movable or immovable
property.
Not to prejudice special legal provisions: Where a law in
force provides for a separate provision in the matters regulated
by this Code, no provision of this Code shall be deemed to have
affected such matters.

Chapter-2
General Principles of civil law
General applicability of principles and provisions: The
principles and provisions referred to in this Chapter shall generally
be applicable to the matters of civil laws.
5. Ignorance of law not to be excused: The ignorance of law shall
not be excused. Every one shall be presumed to have the
knowledge of law.
6. Act against public interest not to be carried out: No one shall
carry out any act in such a manner that it may be against public
interest.
7. Act contrary to law to be invalid: An act contrary to law shall be
invalid.
8. A wrongdoer to bear damages: (1) Whosoever causes loss or
damage to another person by committing a wrong while doing or
causing to be done an act shall have to provide compensation
therefor.
(2) Every person shall himself /herself have to bear the
consequences of the wrong act committed by him/her.
Act causing nuisance to other not to be committed: No one shall
commit or cause to be committed any act that causes nuisance,
annoyance or damage to prestige, reputation or property of other
person.
10. Not to enjoy benefit of wrong: No one shall be entitled to enjoy
benefit accrued from his/her own wrong.
11. Act against interest to be invalid: Any act carried out against
interest of a person who is under one's own guardianship,
curatorship, subjection or influence or where he/she is likely to
have influence shall be invalid.
12. Personality to be recognized: Every person shall have to recognize
other person's personality.
13. Good neighborhood to be maintained: Every person shall have to
so maintain good neighborhood as not to cause damage, loss to the
community or neighbors of his/her residence.
14. Not to be relieved from civil liability: A person shall not be
relieved from a civil liability under the law merely on the ground
that proceedings of criminal offense is initiated or not initiated
against him/her.
15. Customs or tradition contrary to law not to be recognized: No
custom or tradition contrary to law shall be recognized in
dispensation of justice.
16. Applicable to foreigners as well: Except in cases where the
subject, context or nature requires application only to a Nepali
citizen, this Code or provision concerning civil law shall equally be
applicable to a foreigner as well.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Civil Rights
To be equal in eye of law: (1) Every citizen shall be equal in
the eye of law.
No citizen shall be excluded from the equal
protection of law.
Discrimination not to be made: (1) No citizen shall be
discriminated in the application of general law on grounds of
religion, color, caste, tribe, sex, origin, language or ideological
conviction.
No citizen shall be discriminated on grounds of
race, community or profession nor shall be prevented on
grounds of caste or race from using service, amenities or
utilities of public use or entering into a public place or public
religious place or performing religious act in such places.
There shall be no discrimination with regard to
remuneration and social security between men and women for
the same work.
In a governmental or public office, a person shall be
appointed only on the basis of the qualifications determined by
the law. In so appointing, no person shall be discriminated on
grounds of religion, color, caste, race, sex, origin, language, or
ideological conviction.
Special Measures not to be taken as Discrimination not to be
deemed, where specific provision is made: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 17 and 18, where special
measures have been made by law for protection, empowerment
or development of women, dalit, indigenous ethnic people,
Madhesi, peasant, worker or economically, socially and
culturally disadvantaged class, the old, the disabled or
physically, or mentally handicapped person, such measures shall
not be deemed to be a discrimination.
Guarantee of freedoms and rights: (1) No personal liberty of
any person shall be deprived except in accordance with law.
(2) Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the following
freedoms and rights:-
To put one’s opinion and expression,
To assemble peacefully without arms,
To form union and association,
To move and reside in any part of Nepal,
To practice any profession, employment, industry,
business and to carryout the transaction of property,
To obtain education of one's own choice or in one's
own mother tongue,
To earn, use, transfer property and to carry out any
other transaction of property,
To profess and practice one's own religion practiced
from time immemorial, subject to the compliance of
public morality and traditions,
To preserve and promote the language, script or
culture of one's own community,
To operate religious place and religious trust, by
maintaining independent existence of one's own
religious community.
To protect or maintain privacy of one's own body,
residence, property, document, correspondences or
information.
21. Right to Privacy deemed to be violated: (1) Whoever commits,
save pursuant to law, any of the following acts without
obtaining consent of the concerned person, shall be deemed to
have violated right to privacy:-
entry into any person’s residence,
opening a person's correspondences or using it,
taping or recording or listening the discourse, speech,
sound through the medium of telephone or other
technology,
watching, publishing or disseminating activities,
behaviors of personal life of a person,
taking figure or photograph of a person,
making public of other's name, figure, photograph,
sound by imitation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (d)
and (e) of sub-Section (1), where a person carries out the acts
referred to in those clauses for literary or artistic purpose or
public interest, the right to privacy shall not be deemed to have
been violated.
Right to make contract: Every citizen shall have the right to
make a contract subject to the law.
No taxation save in accordance with law: No tax shall be
levied and collected from a persons' property or income save in
accordance with law.
Not to employ in work against will: No person shall be
employed into a work against his/her will.
Property not to be obtained or acquired: (1) No property of
anyone shall be acquired or recovered except in accordance with
law for the purpose of public good.
(2) No property of anyone shall be auctioned or forfeited except
in accordance with law.
Complaint may be filed: (1) A petition may be filed at the
Supreme Court, Appellate Court or District Court for the writ of
habeas corpus by the person who is arrested or detained or
anyone else on his/her behalf.
(2) In case any person has filed a petition at more than one court,
the petition filed at the higher court shall be maintained.
(3) If a person commits or there is sufficient suspicion that
he/she is going to commit an act in contravention of this Chapter,
the person going to be aggrieved from such act may, for
enforcement of his/her right, file a petition at the Appellate
Court or District Court having territorial jurisdiction.
(4) In case it is found from inquiry into the petition filed
pursuant to sub-Section (1) that the person has been arrested or
detained against law, the concerned court shall order to release
him/her immediately.
(5) In case it is found from inquiry in respect of the petition
filed pursuant to sub-Section (3) that the respondent has caused
some damage or is about to cause damage in the right of the
petitioner, the concerned court may issue an injunctive or
directive order to such a respondent not to commit or cause to be
committed any act damaging the petitioner’s right and, where
some acts have already been committed, not to commit or cause
to be committed the remaining act or to cause him/her to commit
on act.
Compensation to be awarded: If, from an examination of the
complaint filed pursuant to Section 26, the respondent is found
to have committed any act causing damage to the complainant,
the concerned court shall, having regard to the circumstances,
order the respondent to pay reasonable compensation to the
complainant.
Where an official or employee working in a governmental
or public body is held to have knowingly violated the civil rights
referred to in this Chapter, such an official or an employee shall
personally bear the compensation referred to in sub-Section (1).
Compensation for filing false complaint: (1) Where a person
is held to have filed a complaint with the intention of knowingly
causing pain or loss or damage to a person, the concerned court
shall order the person so filing the false complaint to pay a
reasonable compensation to the respondent.
The compensation to be paid under sub-Section (1) shall
include the cost incurred by the respondent for defense before
the court, court fees and legal practitioner's cost as well.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint whenever he/she desires in case of
his/her arrest or detention, and in other cases within a period of
six months from the date of carrying out of such an act.

Part - 2
CONCERNING
PERSONS

Chapter -1
Provision Concerning Natural Person
To be recognized as a person: Every person shall, immediately
after the birth, be recognized as a person and shall be entitled to
exercise right under law until he/she survives.
Right to Name: (1) Every person shall, immediately after birth,
have right to name and shall be entitled to use the given name
respectfully.
Every person shall have the right to defend his/her
name, reputation and prestige and such right shall not be
transferable to others.
No person shall be allowed to abuse other’s name.
To be considered fully competent: (1) Every person who
attains the age of eighteen years shall be considered to become
an adult and shall, in the same capacity, be considered to be a
legally fully competent.
(2) A person competent pursuant to sub-Section (1) may,
subject to law, exercise every right, bear every obligation and
discharge every duty.
To be Considered Incompetent: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 32, a person who has not attained the age
of ten years, or even if attained that age, the person who cannot
protect his/her rights and interest for the reason of unsoundness
of mind shall be considered to be legally incompetent.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Code "unsoundness of
mind" means the condition of being incapable, due to physical
and mental ill health, of knowing the act done by oneself in
general understanding and consequences thereof.
An incompetent person does not have to bear any type of
legal obligation and while exercising a right, it has to be
exercised or cause to be exercised only with the consent of
guardian or curator or through the guardian or the curator, as the
case may be.
In case of executing a deed on behalf of an incompetent
person, it has to be executed or caused to be executed through,
his/her guardian or curator, as the case may be.
To be considered quasi-competent: (1) A person who has
attained the age of ten years but not completed the age of
eighteen years shall be considered as a quasi-competent person.
A quasi-competent person may, subject to law, exercise
every right, bear every obligation and discharge every duty.
(3) A quasi-competent person shall, while exercising a right, it
has to be exercised or cause to be exercised through the guardian
or the curator, as the case may be.
In executing a deed by a quasicompetent person, it shall
be executed in the presence of his/her guardian or curator as the
case may be.
To be according to court decision: If a dispute arises about a
person's full competency, incompetency or quasi competency, it
shall be according to decision of the court.
Physical examination or organ transplantation may caused
to be carried out: (1) Any person may, subject to law, get
his/her body examined, treated or transplanted or collected any
organ or part or a sample of his/her body.
In case a person is incapable in such a way that
he/she could not express his/her consent, his/her guardian or
curator may, for the interest of such a person, carryout or cause
to be carried out the act referred to in sub-Section (1).
Cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act may be specified:
Any person may, while he/she is alive, specify the method of
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act to be followed after
his/her death.
Where a person has specified the method of
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act pursuant to sub Section (1), his/her successor shall have to conduct his/her
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts accordingly.
Where a person has not specified the method of
his/her cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act, his/her
successor shall have to conduct such person's cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal act according to prevailing customs
and tradition.
Corpse or organ may be donated: (1) Any person may express
in writing his/her will to donate after his/her death his/her
corpse or any organ of body or any part thereof to a person to
use or cause to be used for a particular work.
Where a person expresses his/her will pursuant to
sub-Section (1), his/her, successor shall have to use deceased’s
corpse, part of the body or a portion thereof according to the
will of the deceased.
Where a will is not expressed pursuant to sub Section or, even where expressed, if such will fails to be
executed or becomes impossible to be executed, his/her
successor shall have to conduct the deceased's cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal act according to prevailing tradition
and culture.
To be considered a place of residence : (1) Where a person's
place of residence needs to be determined, the place given by
him/her for that purpose, where he/she has so given and if not
so given, his/her place of permanent residence within Nepal
shall be considered to be his/her place of residence.
Where a person does not have residence or his/her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-Section (1), the place
of his/her abode for the time being shall be considered to be
his/her place residence.
Where a person does not have a residence or his/her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-Section (1) or (2), the
place of carrying out of trade, business, employment or
transaction, if he/she is so carrying out, shall be considered
his/her place of residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), (2) or (3), where the place of a person's residence is changed,
the place where he/she is living for the time being shall be
considered to be his/her place of residence.
Where the residence of a quasi-competent person
needs to be determined, the place where the guardian or curator,
as the case may be, of such a person resides shall be considered
as his/her place of residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, if a person considers a place, as the place of his/her
residence for a particular purpose, such a place shall be
considered to be his /her place of residence.
Presumed to be dead: (1) If a person disappears without any
notice for a consecutive period of twelve years or if a person to
whom it is natural to have information about such a disappeared
person has not received any information about him/her since last
twelve years, such a person shall, except in case an evidence
establishing that he/she is alive is received, be deemed to be
dead.
Provided that in any of the following circumstances, such a
person shall be deemed to have died after completion of the
following period:-
In the case of a person having completed
eighty years, five years;
In the case of a soldier deputed to war field,
four years from the cessation of the war;
In the case of a person traveling in an aero
plane, ship or other vehicle that met with an
accident, three years from the date of such an
accident.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of
proviso to sub-Section (1), where a person dies in an accident
and there is no evidence of another person meeting with the
same accident to remain alive, such a person also shall be
deemed to have died simultaneously.
(3) Where more than one person are dead at one and the
same time in an accident, each person so died is deemed, except
in the case proved otherwise, to have been died simultaneously.
Provided that where for a particular purpose a question
that which of the persons died first in such an accident requires
to be determined, the person who was older by age at the time of
death shall, unless otherwise proved, be deemed to have died
first.
In case the concerned person files a petition stating
that any person has disappeared without a notice or died due to a
natural calamity or accident and requests for a judicial
declaration on such person's death, disclosing therewith the date,
place and bases of the death, the court may, after examining
evidence, issue an order of judicial declaration on the death of
such a person.
If a person declared dead pursuant to sub-Section (4)
is alive and himself/herself files a petition to get the judicial
declaration passed earlier to be annulled or if his/her successor
files a petition for annulment of the previous judicial declaration
on death for the reason that the date of the death of such
deceased happened to be different than the date referred to in the
judicial declaration; the court shall, having examined into this
matter, annual or amend the judicial declaration made pursuant
to sub-Section (4).
Provided that,-
Where a wife alive has concluded another
marriage
after
declaration,
matrimonial relationship with the person
declared dead can not be re-established.
There shall be no adverse affect on the legal
rights of the person declared to be dead.
The act that has already been carried out
pursuant to the previous judicial declaration
shall not be prejudiced by virtue of the
establishment of a new date of death.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint as follows:-
In case of the situation referred to in Section 36,
within three months from the date of the action taken;
In case of the situation referred to in sub-Section (5)
of Section 40, within six months from the date of
having information thereof,
In situations other than those referred to in clauses
(a) and (b), within six months from the date of
carrying out of such action.

Chapter -2
Provision Concerning Legal Person
Legal person to acquire capacity: (1) A body corporate
incorporated pursuant to law shall obtain legal personality and
obtain legal competency in the same capacity.
In order to acquire legal competency pursuant to
sub-Section (1), such a body corporate shall have to be
registered.
Except where separate provisions have been made in
law for registration pursuant to sub-Section (2), an application
shall be submitted to the competent authority having specified
the following matters:-
Name of the body corporate,
Head Office of the body corporate,
Objectives and functions of the body corporate,
The capital structure, if any, of the body corporate
and details thereof,
Other necessary details.
After registration of a body corporate pursuant to
sub-Section (2), such a body corporate shall be deemed to
have been incorporated.
A legal person shall have a corporate personality and
shall use a separate seal for its own proceedings.
A body corporate incorporated pursuant to this
Section shall be an autonomous and body corporate with
perpetual succession and may, in the same capacity, carry out as
a person the following functions:-
to acquire, hold, earn, possess, dispose off, sell
or manage otherwise property,
to execute a contract, exercise rights and
discharge obligations under the contract or to
assume otherwise right or obligation of any
type,
to frame bye-laws required to operate its own
functions, proceedings or business,
to appoint necessary employees to carry out its
functions,
to open branches or other office subject to
its statute and law,
to open an account in a bank or financial
institution and to operate the account,
to do other functions according to law.
A legal person may initiate a complaint or other
legal proceedings in its own name and a complaint or other legal
proceedings may be initiated also against such a person.
To obtain legal capacity after registration: (1) A legal person
shall obtain legal capacity in respect of civil and commercial act
and activities after its incorporation
The legal capacity obtained pursuant to sub-Section
(1) shall stand existed until the legal person is liquidated,
dissolved or wounded up under the law.
Legal capacity deemed to be acquired automatically:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 42, the following
body, as a legal person, shall be deemed to have ipso facto
obtained capacity:-
The State of Nepal,
Government of Nepal,
Ministries,
secretariats,
departments
Government
Nepal
other
government offices,
Courts, constitutional bodies or any body
thereunder,
Village
Development
Committees,
Municipalities
District
Development
Committees,
Commission, committee and other similar
other bodies set up by Government of Nepal,
Organization or bodies set up under law,
such organizations established for public
purpose as shrine, temple, deity place, Chaitya,
monasteries, mosque, church, public rest house
(dharmashala), Public inn, graveyard which
has been operated from time immemorial and
possesses movable and immovable property,
Community schools or colleges established for
public purpose.
Place of location of legal person: The place of location of a
legal person shall be as specified at the time of incorporation of
body corporate and where such place is not so specified the
place where its headquarters or registered office is located and
where such office or place also is not specified, the place where
the main administrative office or transaction and business of
such a body corporate is located shall be considered to be the
place of the location.
Management and operation of a legal person: (1) A legal
person shall be managed and operated in accordance with the
provisions of such a person and where such provision is not
made, it shall be managed and operated by one or more directors.
The legal person shall be responsible for the
management and operation made by a director or directors
pursuant to sub-Section (1).
Where there are more than one director, the decision
taken by majority directors shall, except otherwise provided, be
deemed to be decision of the legal person.
Operation of business of a legal person: (1) In operating
business on behalf of a legal person, the business shall, except
otherwise provided, be operated by directors of such persons.
In operating business pursuant to sub-Section (1),
director or directors may so delegate power to any director or
directors or other person as to operating any business.
Right or liability to devolve upon merger of a legal person:
(1) If a legal person is, for any reason, merged with another
legal person, the right and liability of such a person shall be as
specified at the time of such merger.
Where a specification is not made pursuant to sub Section (1), the right and liability of the legal person to be
merged shall be devolved to the legal person with which such a
person is merged.
Legal person may act as agent: A legal person may act as an
agent of any other person.
Not to participate in decision-making in case of conflict of
interest: (1) A director shall not take part in a decision making
process on a matter involving his/her personal interest.
Where a decision is affected by conflict of interest
under sub-Section (1), such a decision shall be void.
Legal person to be liable: If a loss or damage is caused to a
person from an act and action done by a person on behalf of a
legal person, such a legal person shall be liable therefor and bear
compensation therefor.
Provided that if any loss is caused by doing an act beyond
the objective and competency of the legal person, the director or
a person doing such an act shall personally be liable therefor.
Assets or liability to be settled: If a legal person is dissolved
for any reason, the assets and liability of such a person shall be
required to be settled according to laws.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out according
to this Chapter may file a complaint within the period of thirty
five days in the case of Section 50 and in other cases, within the
period of six months of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Bankruptcy of Natural Person
Bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated: (1) Where a
person’s debt and other liability to be borne by him/her exceeds
his/her assets, bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated for
payment or recovery of debt or settlement of liability from such
assets.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), no bankruptcy proceedings shall be initiated in the
following conditions:-
If a person who has regular income proves that
his/her income can pay or set off debt or other
liability within a certain period or the creditor
is satisfied in such matter,
If the person likely to be a bankrupt asks a
period of up to five years specifying the period
of time to pay the debts of creditors and
sources thereof from the date of origin of
conditions necessitating commencement of
bankruptcy proceedings in order to enjoin or
cause to be enjoined from initiating that
proceedings or,
If the creditor does not agree to initiate or
cause to be initiated bankruptcy proceedings.
Explanation:
(1) For the purpose of this Chapter, the term
"assets" means the concerned person's property
standing for the time being or to be earned or
likely to be earned up to the time prior to
completion
bankruptcy
proceedings
pursuant to this Chapter.
For the purpose of clause (c), the term
"creditor" means, where there are more than
one creditor, creditors or a group of creditors
who hold fifty percent or more debt over the
total debt of the person likely to become
bankrupt.
If a debt or a claim of a creditor is settled from
assets of a person under this Chapter, such a
person shall be deemed to become a bankrupt.
The court shall have to send the record of the
persons being bankrupt pursuant to sub-section
(3) to the Bankruptcy Administration Office to
be established according to law.
The Bankruptcy Administration Office shall
have to maintain the updated record referred to
in sub-section (4).
Upon declared to be bankrupt pursuant to subsection (3), he/she shall not be required to pay
debt or fulfill the obligation other than the
debt or obligation he/she has to pay or fulfill
and settled under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (6), the following obligation shall have
to be fulfilled from the trade, business or
transaction
he/she
starts
his/her
declaration of being bankrupt:-
Taxes, fees or charges to be paid to
Government of Nepal;
Amount of punishment or fine to be paid
according to order of a court;
Amount to be paid for embezzlement of
property of the person under his/her
guardianship or curatorship;
Amount to be said for the goods stolen;
Amount to be paid for embezzlement of
property of trust.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this section, in case any person is bankrupt
he/she may carry out any trade, business or
transaction other than an act or activity he/she
is prohibited to do in that capacity according
to law.
Petition to be filed to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) In
order to initiate bankruptcy proceedings pursuant to sub-Section
(1) of Section 54, the person who is likely to be a bankrupt
himself/herself or a creditor or group of creditors having claim
at least of twenty five percent or more over the debt of the total
debt if the amount of the debt is disclosed and if the amount of
the debt is not disclosed having a claim more than one hundred
thousand rupees borrowed by such a person may file a petition
before the court.
(2) Where a person likely to be a bankrupt himself /
herself files a petition pursuant to sub-Section (1), the following
details shall have to specify in the petition:-
exact statement of his/her total assets and
value thereof,
statement of the total debt amount borrowed
by him/her, interest accrued thereon and
details of the creditor or creditors providing
such debt along with their address,
if he/she has to discharge other liability,
details thereof,
reason for failing to pay debt or discharge
other liability.
Where a creditor or group of creditors files a
petition pursuant to sub-Section (1), the petitioner shall have to
specify in the petition the evidence of his/her borrower likely to
be a bankrupt, details of his/her assets to the extent of
petitioner's
knowledge
approximate
value
thereof,
petitioner's claim, if the petitioner has the knowledge of other
creditor's debt or claim such debt and claim and also addresses
of such creditors.
Before filing a petition pursuant to sub-Section (1)
to initiate bankruptcy proceedings, a creditor or group of
creditor shall have to give a notice to the borrower with a time
limit at least of three months to pay his/her debt or discharge
other liability and matter of filing a petition before the court to
initiate bankruptcy proceedings if the borrower fails to pay debt
within that period.
Notice to be given to the creditor: (1) Where a borrower files a
petition pursuant to Section 2 to initiate bankruptcy proceedings,
the concerned court shall issue a notice of thirty five days and
serve the same in the name of the creditor or group of creditors
whose debt the borrower has specified as payable and publish a
notice relating thereto in any daily newspaper of national level.
The notice to be published under sub-Section (1) and
(2) shall contain a statement inviting any other person having
claim, if any, of any type over the assets of the person whose
assets is under bankruptcy proceeding to make a claim with
evidence within the time limit as specified in the same sub Section
The claim made within the time-limit under sub Section (1) or (2) by the creditor or group of creditors or others
shall be considered to be the final claim made against the assets
of the borrower and the bankruptcy proceedings of his/her assets
shall be commenced on the same basis.
Notice to be given to borrower: (1) Where a creditor or group
of creditor has filed a petition to initiate the bankruptcy
proceedings of the assets of the borrower pursuant to Section 55,
the concerned court shall have to issue a notice along with a
time limit of thirty five days to the borrower to reply whether or
not the bankruptcy proceedings requires to be carried out, and if
there exists any grounds for not carrying out bankruptcy
proceedings, to appear before the court with evidence thereof.
Where a notice is given to the borrower pursuant to
sub-Section (1), a notice shall be given to other creditor or the
claimant to make claim in that respect within thirty five days
and such a notice shall be published in any daily newspapers of
national level.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), in case the court deems that the property under bankruptcy
proceedings may be embezzled or such property may not
appropriately be managed if it is allowed to be managed by
himself/herself or by a member of his/her family, the court may,
on application of a party or on its own discretion, handover the
responsibility of management of such property to any of the
following persons:-
a) The person licensed as bankruptcy professional
according to law;
b) The Bankruptcy trustee appointed according to law;
c) Any employee of officer level of the court or legal
practitioner appointed by the court.
The claim of a person who fails to submit a claim
within the period under sub-Section (2) shall not be valid after
that period.
The fee to be charged for publishing a notice in a
national-level daily paper pursuant to sub-section (2) or subsection (1) of Section 56 shall be recovered from the concerned
applicant.
The fee recovered pursuant to sub-section (5) may
be got to be paid from the debtor in the course of bankruptcy.
Order to be given to initiate bankruptcy proceedings : (1)
Where a petition is filed before the court pursuant to Section 55
to initiate bankruptcy proceedings, the court shall have to give
an order as to whether it would be appropriate to initiate
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of that petition or not.
Where an order is given to initiate bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-Section (1), the court shall, at the
request of the person likely to be a bankrupt himself or herself
or the creditor, order any other member of the family of such
person to keep as it is basis for the purpose of bankruptcy, the
assets of the person in respect of whose assets the bankruptcy
proceedings is to be commenced.
If, in issuing an order pursuant sub-Section (2), the
court is of the opinion, from the petition of the creditor or
otherwise, that such a person may misappropriate the assets or
that the assets shall not be distributed in an equitable manner,
the court may, by specifying reasons therefor, designate a local
body or any person as the manager of such assets.
The local body or person designated pursuant to sub Section (3) shall have to manage the assets likely to be bankrupt
as ordered by the court.
Transaction to be ipso facto stayed or void: Where a court
issues an order pursuant to sub-Section (1) of Section 58 to
initiate the bankruptcy proceedings of a person's assets, any of
the following activities can not be carried out without the order
of the court after issuance of such an order and where such
activities are already commenced or are being carried out but
not completed, such activities shall, ipso facto, be stayed:
to transfer in any manner to any person the title to,
bail, pledge, mortgage or to lease or rent in any way
for a period of more than one year, the assets of a
person who is likely to be a bankrupt,
to attach or, execute the pledge, mortgage of, the
assets of the person likely to be a bankrupt
according to the judgment of a court,
to pay debt or discharge liability of any person from
the assets of the person likely to be a bankrupt.
deed,
contract,
practice,
transaction
arrangements executed in contravention of the provision referred
to in sub-Section (1) shall, ipso facto, be deemed to be void.
Opportunity to be provided to reconcile the sum of debt:
Where the court orders to start bankruptcy proceedings pursuant
to sub-Section (1) of Section 58, the local body or a person who
is awarded responsibility to manage property pursuant to sub Section (3) of the same Section shall, after the assets, debt and
other liability of the borrower are ascertained, call a meeting of
the debtors, creditors, or other claimants.
In the meeting called pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the creditor shall be given, by mutual consent of the person
likely to be a bankrupt and the creditor or other claimants, a
reasonable opportunity to waive his/her claim wholly or
partially from the whole or any assets of the borrower or to
reconcile sum by taking the money less than his/her claim.
In reconciling the sum pursuant to sub-Section (2),
an arrangement may be made whereby a creditor pays the debt
or claim of some or majority creditors and such a creditor
submits a lump sum claim against such person.
Where the parties secure consent pursuant to sub Section (2) or (3) or where the concerned parties agree, for any
reasons, to stay the bankruptcy proceedings for the time being, a
joint petition may be filed before the court accordingly.
If a petition is filed for staying the bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-Section (4), the court shall have to
make an order to stay as requested bankruptcy proceedings for a
period not exceeding the period set forth in clause (b) of sub Section (2) of Section 1.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-Section (5),
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the assets of such property
can not be carried out until the expiry of that period.
Priority order of paying debt or liability: (1) In carrying out
or causing to be carried out bankruptcy proceedings of the assets
of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the debt to be paid or the
liability to be discharged by such person shall be settled, on the
basis of the following priority order, from the assets of such a
person:
incurred
carrying
bankruptcy
proceedings,
the liability of the secured creditor who has provided
debt against a pledge or mortgage, to the extent of
such pledge or mortgage,
tax, fine to be paid to Government of Nepal or other
government charges and dues,
debt of the creditors other than those referred to in
clause (b),
claim of other claimants other than those referred
to in clauses (b), (c) or (d).
In paying or setting off debt or liability pursuant to
sub-Section (1), where there are more than one creditors or
claimants of one and same priority order, the debt or claim shall
be set off in the proportionate rate from the assets bankrupted
in the ratio of the debt or claim of each creditor or claimant.
In paying the debt of the secured creditors pursuant
to clause (b) sub-Section (1), if, after recovery of his/her debt
from the assets pledged or mortgaged to him/her, there remains
any portion or sum of such pledge, other creditors or claimants
may make claim over such portion or sum.
Provided that if the secured creditor's debt is not fully
recovered from such assets, he/she can not make a claim over
other property.
Debt of a creditor who shows excess debt not to receive
priority: If the creditor and the person likely to be a bankrupt
are proved to have shown, by collusion, excess debt or claim
from a fictitious transaction with malafide intention of causing
loss to other creditors or claimants, notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-Section (1) of Section 61, the debt or liability
of such a creditor shall be paid or set off only after the debt or
liability of other creditor or claimant is satisfied.
Property to be set aside: Prior to effecting bankruptcy of the
assets of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the following
property shall be set aside and bankruptcy proceedings shall be
carried out from remaining assets:-
if there exists any property as the personal property
of a person other than one who is likely be a
bankrupt, such property,
clothes up to three pairs and shoes up to three pairs
being worn or to be worn by the person who is likely
to be a bankrupt and a member of the undivided
family of such a person,
one set of cooking and dining utensils, one set of
bedding
materials
reasonable
number
furniture, required to the undivided family member
of the person likely to be a bankrupt;
medicines and health-related equipment required to
the person likely to be bankrupt and the member of
his/her undivided family;
books required for study;
food grain required for subsistence for not exceeding
three months to the persons referred to in clause (b);
one set of tools, instruments or arms related to the
profession of the persons referred to in clause (b).
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-Section (1), the total value of the
property referred to in those clauses shall not exceed thirty
thousand rupees.
Assets not to be concealed: (1) A person who files a petition
pursuant to Section 55 for commencing bankruptcy proceedings
of his/her assets shall have to submit an exact inventory of
his/her whole assets.
(2) In submitting an inventory under sub-section (1), if
he/she conceals or suppress such assets with malafide intention
of causing loss or damage to the creditor, a separate suit may be
instituted against him/her.
Where assets have been concealed pursuant to sub Section (1), and such assets are discovered before completion of
bankruptcy proceedings, the proceedings referred to in sub Section (2) of Section 61 shall be carried out in respect of the
creditor and claimant who discover the assets and other creditor
and claimant as well.
If the assets under sub-Section (3) are discovered
by a creditor or claimant after bankruptcy proceedings has been
completed, where such a creditor or a claimant has already
satisfied the sum according to his/her claim at the time of
bankruptcy proceedings he/she shall be given ten percent
amount of the assets so discovered and where his/her claim
amount was not satisfied, his/her sum shall be caused to be
satisfied from such assets and the remaining assets shall be
distributed pursuant to the same sub-Section to other creditors
and claimants.
Provided that if the creditor or claimant is the successor or
relative of the bankrupt person, he/she shall not be entitled to
such facility.
If the concealed assets are balanced after payment to
the creditor or claimant pursuant to sub-Section (4), such assets
shall be returned to the concerned person.
Status of bankrupted to be terminated: (1) The status of a
bankrupt person falling under bankruptcy shall remain for a
period of twelve years from the date on which he/she has
become a bankrupt.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a bankrupt person pays all liabilities payable to the creditors
at the time of bankruptcy, he/she may file a petition to a court to
terminate the status of a bankruptcy along with evidences
thereof.
(3) If a petition is filed under sub-section (2), the court
shall, in order to conduct a hearing thereupon, order to serve a
summon giving a period of fifteen days time limit excluding a
time required for journey, to all creditors who were either
partially paid or unpaid at the time bankruptcy of such a person
and invite them therefor.
While conducting a hearing upon the petition
submitted under sub-section (2), the court may, if it seems that
the bankrupt person has satisfied all the debts and liabilities
which were unpaid at the time of bankruptcy, order to revoke the
order issued at the time of bankruptcy of the person.
(5) If an order is issued under sub-section (4), the status of
the bankrupt person shall be deemed to be terminated after three
years from the date on which such an order is issued.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under
Chapter may file a complaint within the following periods from
the date of arising out of the cause of action for commencement
of the bankruptcy proceedings:-
a) In matters under Section 54, within three years from the
date of arising out of the cause of action;
b) In matters under Sections 62 and 64, within two years
from the date of having knowledge thereof;
c) In the matters other than those referred to in clauses (a)
and (b), within the period of six months from the date of
carrying out of such act.

PART-3
FAMILY LAW

Chapter -1
Provision concerning Marriage
Marriage deemed to be solemnized: If a man or woman
accepts each other as husband and wife through any occasion,
ceremony, formal or any act, a marriage shall be deemed to
have been solemnized.
Marriage to be an inviolable social bond: (1) Marriage shall
be a permanent, inviolable and holy social and legal bond, based
on free consent, established between man and woman to start
conjugal and family life.
The marital bond under sub-section (1) shall subsist
until extinguished pursuant to Section 82.
Freedom of a marriage: (1) Every person shall, subject to law,
have the freedom to conclude a marriage, establishing family
and spending conjugal life.
Every person's family life shall be inviolable.
Marriage may be concluded: (1) Subject to this Chapter, a
marriage may be concluded between a man and woman in the
following conditions:-
if a man and woman agrees to accept each other as
husband and wife,
if the man and woman are not relatives, punishable
by law in incest,
if matrimonial relationship of both the man and the
woman does not exist,
if the man has completed twenty two years of age
and the woman has completed twenty years of age.
Provided that a marriage may be solemnized with
the consent of guardian even if the man and woman
have attained eighteen years of age.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of subsection (1), it shall not hinder to solemnize or cause to be
solemnized a marriage within the relationship that is allowed to
marry in accordance with the prevailing practices in an ethnic
community or a clan.
Marriage not to be solemnized: (1) No person shall solemnize
or cause to be solemnized a marriage to a man or woman, as the
case may be, lacking the requisites for marriage under Section
No person shall solemnize or cause to be solemnized
a marriage between a man or woman of the following conditions
by way of misrepresentation:-
contracted
human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Hepatitis
One who has already been proved that he/she
has no sexual organs, is an impotent or having
no reproductive capability;
One who is a dumb, or has lost hearing
capacity, has both eye-blinded or is suffering
from leprosy;
One who is not having sound mind;
One who is already a married;
One who is a pregnant;
One who is convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude by a court.
Marriage to be void: A marriage solemnized in the following
conditions shall, ipso facto, be void:-
A marriage solemnized without the consent of the
man or woman,
A marriage solemnized between the relatives,
punishable by law in incest.
Provided that the marriage solemnized pursuant to
sub-section (2) of Section 70 shall not be void.
The void marriage under sub-section (1) shall be
invalid ab initio.
Voidable Marriage: (1) Any of the parties to a marriage
solemnized in the following circumstances may get such a
marriage annulled if he/she does not accept the marriage:-
If the marriageable age set forth in clause (d) of

Section 70 is not completed,
If the marriage is solemnized or caused to be
solemnized by misrepresenting pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 71.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), a marriage shall be void only with consent of the woman if
the woman is pregnant as a consequence of the marriage.
Marriage to be deemed solemnized if a child is born from
physical intercourse: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (2) of Section 69, if a woman is proved to have
produced a child by conceiving pregnancy from physical
intercourse with a man, marriage between such a man and a
woman shall, ipso facto, be deemed to have been solemnized.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), no marriage shall be deemed to have been solemnized
between a man and woman in the following circumstances even
if a child is born from physical intercourse with a man:-
If a woman gives birth to a child by conceiving
pregnancy as the consequence of rape,
Except in case of the relationship of under subsection (2) of Section 70, if a woman gives birth to a
child by conceiving pregnancy from a physical
intercourse with a man within the relationship
punishable by law for incest.
No lawful rights of a child already born to be prejudiced:
There shall be no prejudice in the lawful rights of the child born
from marriage if the marriage becomes void pursuant to Section
72 or the marriage is declared to be void pursuant to Section 73
or of the child born in the events referred to in sub-section (1) of

Section 74.
Marriage to be registered: (1) A husband and wife shall have
to get their marriage registered by filing an application to the
concerned local body.
Provided that in the circumstance referred to in subsection (1) of Section 74, either of the husband or wife may file
an application for registration of the marriage.
(2) A husband and wife residing outside Nepal may submit
an application for registration of marriage before the Nepalese
embassy or consulate general located in the country in which
they have been residing.
(3) If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2) for registration of a marriage, the concerned authority shall,
after registering the marriage in the book relating to marriage
maintained in its office, issue the Marriage Registration
Certificate to the applicant within fifteen days of submission of
the application in the format as specified by Government of
Nepal.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
"Concerned authority" means the authority to
register a marriage.
"Office" also includes the office of a local
body.
(4) If the marriage seems not liable to be registered
according to the application filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the concerned authority shall inform the applicant
specifying the reasons therefor within a period of seven days of
the filing of the application.
(5) In case either of the parties does not appear for
registration of a marriage according to the application filed
pursuant to the proviso to sub-section (1), the concerned
authority shall register the marriage after inquiring such a party.
(6) While inquiring pursuant to sub-section (5), in case
such a party expresses disagreement, the concerned authority
shall not register the marriage and inform the applicant that the
decision on that matter shall be made as decided by court.
The concerned authority shall have to safely
maintain the records of the details of the registration of the
marriage under this Section.
The couples married before commencement of this
Code may, if they so desire, get their marriage registered
pursuant to this Section.
Provided that marriage between those couples shall not be
deemed to be legally invalid merely for the reason that such
marriage is not registered.
Marriage by registration: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (2) of Section 69 and Section 74, if a
man and woman desires to solemnize a marriage by registration,
they shall have to file an application before the concerned
district court, if they are living within Nepal, and before the
Nepalese embassy or consulate general, if they have been living
outside Nepal, specifying therein their name, surname, age,
address, profession, the name of their father, mother, grandfather, grand-mother, whether previously married or not, if
married, the details of the dissolution of a marriage and also the
name of at least two witnesses.
In order to file an application pursuant to subsection (1), either the man or the woman or both must have
resided from at least fifteen days in the concerned district if the
application has to be filed before the district court and, if the
application is to be filed before the embassy or consulate office,
in the country in which such an embassy or consulate general’s
office is situated.
Decision to be made as to whether marriage is solemnizable:
(1) If an application is filed pursuant to Section 77 for
solemnization of a marriage by registration, the concerned
authority shall have to make, after making a necessary inquiry, a
decision within seven days of the filing of the application, as to
whether or not the marriage is solemnizable.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if the marriage authority based in a foreign country has
suspicion about the proposed marriage, it shall have to refer the
matter to Government of Nepal and dispose off the matter
according to the decision of Government of Nepal.
Deed of Consent to be prepared: If a decision is made
pursuant to Section 78 to the effect that marriage is
solemnizable between the applicants, the concerned officer shall
prepare a deed of consent for marriage recording the matters
specified in the application and a statement to the effect that the
parties to the marriage have consented to accept each other as
husband and wife, cause the contracting parties and witnesses
present to sign on the deed in his/her presence and also
himself/herself sign the deed.
Provision concerning registration of a marriage: (1) After the
deed of consent has been prepared pursuant to Section 79, the
concerned officer shall register such a marriage in the
registration book and himself/herself sign and cause the parties
to the marriage and witnesses present as well to sign in the book.
Once the marriage is registered pursuant to subsection (1), the concerned officer shall issue a Marriage
Registration
Certificate
format
specified
Government of Nepal, to the parties to the marriage registration.
Marriage shall be deemed to have been solemnized
between the petitioners from the date on which the Marriage
Registration Certificate is obtained pursuant to sub-section (2).
Provision concerning use of surname by a married woman:
(1) A married woman may, after marriage, use the surname used
by her father or mother or family name of her husband or both
the surnames.
(2) If a question arises as to the surname of a married
woman, except otherwise proved, she shall be deemed to have
used the surname of her husband.
(3) If the marriage of a woman who has used the surname
of her husband is dissolved, she may, if she so desires, use the
surname used by her father or mother.
Matrimonial relationship deemed to be terminated: In any of
the following circumstances, the marital relation between the
husband and the wife shall be deemed to have been terminated:
if a marriage is annulled pursuant to Section 72 or
if a marriage is dissolved according to law between
husband and wife, or
if the wife concludes another marriage before
effecting divorce pursuant to law.
Re-marriage may be concluded: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a man or woman may remarry in the following conditions:-
if the matrimonial relationship between a husband
and a wife is terminated pursuant to Section 82,
if a husband or wife dies,
if it is proved that husband or wife has contracted
an incurable venereal disease,
if a husband and a wife are legally separated with
taking partition.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within three months from the date
on which such an act is carried out.

Chapter-2
Provision concerning consequences of a marriage
To be considered husband and wife: After solemnization of a
marriage between a man and a woman, they shall be considered,
so long as such matrimonial relationship subsists, each other's
husband and wife.
Relation and obligation of husband and wife: (1) The husband
and wife must have mutual love and good faith.
The husband and wife must establish and spend
conjugal life by living together.
The husband and wife must help, protect and respect
each other.
Husband's home to be considered a residence: Except where a
separate residence is fixed by mutual understanding of the
husband and wife, the husband's home shall be considered to be
a residence of a wife.
To be considered each other's agent: The husband and the
wife shall, except otherwise provided for in the law or except in
cases where there is a legal dispute between husband and wife,
be considered as each other's agent in the general household
affairs.
To provide or cause to be provided maintenance cost in
accordance with reputation: The husband and the wife shall
provide or cause to be provided each other maintenance cost and
health care according to their reputation and ability.
Household affairs to be managed by consent: (1) The husband
and wife of an undivided family shall have to manage the
household affairs by mutual consent according to their property,
income and capacity.
Except otherwise provided for in the law, the
husband and the wife shall seek each other's consent in selling
or otherwise transferring the movable and immovable property
registered in their own name.
Not to preclude from exercising profession, business or
occupation: The husband and the wife shall not preclude each
other from exercising a profession, business, or occupation of
his/her skill, qualifications, capability.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within three months from the date
on which such an act is carried out.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Divorce
Divorce may be effected by consent of both: If both the
husband and the wife desire, they may cause the relationship of
husband and wife divorced at any time.
Husband may effect divorce: The husband may effect divorce
in any of the following circumstances even without consent of
the wife:-
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately under the law, if the wife has been living
separately for three years or more consecutively
without consent of the husband;
If the wife deprives the husband of maintenance
costs or expels him from home;
If the wife commits an act or fraud likely to cause
the death of or grievous hurt or any other greater
physical or mental pain to the husband;
If the wife is proved to have committed adultery.
Wife may affect divorce: The wife may effect divorce in any of
the following circumstances even without consent of the
husband:-
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately under the law, if the husband is living
separately for three years or more consecutively;
If the husband deprives the wife of maintenance
costs or expels her from home;
If the husband commits an act or fraud likely to
cause the death of or grievous hurt or any other
greater physical or mental pain to the wife;
If the husband concludes another marriage;
If the husband is proved to have had sexual
intercourse with another woman;
If the husband is proved to have committed a rape of
the wife.
Petition to be filed for a divorce: The husband or wife, as the
case may be, desiring to get the relationship divorced shall have
to file a petition to a court.
Reconciliation to be made between the husband and wife: If a
petition is filed for a divorce pursuant to Section 96, the court
first shall, to the extent possible, reconcile both the parties
through persuasion.
Divorce to be caused: If the court fails to bring reconciliation
even after persuasion pursuant to Section 97 and the court deems
appropriate to get the relationship divorced than to continue it
any longer, the court shall cause the relationship between them
divorced.
Partition of property to be effected before divorce: (1) In
cases where a divorce is to be affected with the consent of the
husband and the wife or because of the husband, the court shall,
if the wife so demands, cause the partition to be effected
between the husband and the wife before effecting the divorce.
In cases where the husband himself has not obtained
partition from his father or other coparceners. The court shall,
by causing both the parties to provide the list of coparceners,
and if there are other coparceners who are entitled to partition,
by inquiring such coparceners as well, cause partition to be
apportioned between the husband and the wife.
If it appears that partition under sub-section (1) and
(2) will take long time, the court may, by causing the divorce to
be effected between the husband and the wife, order the husband
to provide the wife monthly expense according to the property
and income of the husband until the partition is affected.
Provided that if such a woman concludes another marriage
before affecting partition, she shall not be entitled to a partition
share.
100. Lump sum amount or alimony may caused to be provided:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 99, if the wife
who effects divorce desires to obtain from the husband a lump
sum amount or annual or monthly alimony instead of a partition
share, the court may order the husband to provide such a wife a
lump sum amount or annual or monthly alimony on the basis of
his property or income.
Provided that if such a wife concludes another marriage,
such an amount shall have not to be provided.
101. Maintenance cost may be caused to be provided: If a wife
who has not obtained partition from the husband for there being
no property for partition under Section 99, desires to receive
maintenance cost from the husband and where the husband has
income, the court may cause the husband to pay maintenance
cost to the wife according to his income.
Provided that:
(1) If such a wife concludes another marriage, such cost
shall have not to be paid,
If the income of the wife is higher than that of the
husband, such cost shall have not to be caused to be
awarded.
102. To be according to agreement: Notwithstanding anything
contained in other Sections of this Chapter, where a written
agreement is concluded at the time of effecting divorce between
the husband and wife on partition share or the cost the wife is
entitled to on divorce, it shall be according to such agreement.
Provided that no agreement may be concluded which shall
be contrary to the interest of a minor.
103. Previous child or husband to obtain property: (1) On death of
a divorcee woman, her son and daughter, if any, shall be entitled
to her property, and if not, the husband shall obtain the property
received by her from such a husband and the successor on her
mother's side shall obtain other property.
If a divorcee woman concludes another marriage, the
property obtained by her from the husband shall upon divorce be
obtained by the son, daughter from such husband; if any, and if
not; by the husband prior to divorce.
104. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-4
Provision concerning relation between the parent and children
105. Maternity or paternity to be determined from mother or
father: (1) In case a person's maternity or paternity requires to
be determined, it shall be determined on the basis of his / her
mother or father, as the case may be.
In determining paternity pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person who was the husband of the mother at the time of the
birth of such a person shall be presumed, unless otherwise
proved, to be a father of such a person.
106. Child presumed to be born from husband: Unless otherwise
proved, a child born in the following circumstances shall be
presumed to be born from the married husband:-
Born after one hundred eighty days from the date on
which a marriage was solemnized,
Born within two hundred seventy days from the date
on which a divorce was effected.
107. Paternity may be denied: (1) Except otherwise agreed upon
between the husband and wife, the paternity of a child born to
the wife before one hundred eighty days of the solemnization of
the marriage may be denied by the husband and where the
husband is already dead before the birth of the child by the
successor to the husband.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where a man solemnizes a marriage with a woman with
knowledge or having reasonable ground to know that she was
pregnant before the marriage, the paternity of such a child
cannot be denied merely on ground of birth before that period.
108. Son, daughter or paternity to be claimed: (1) If a child whose
paternity or maternity is not determined has to be claimed as
one's own son or daughter, such a claim shall have to be made
within a period of two years of the child being born or of being
identified, if unidentified.
(2) In claiming the paternity of a child born without the
paternity being identified, a claim shall be made within a period
of two years of the birth of such a child.
Provided that no claim shall be entertained if such a child is
already dead.
109. Paternity of a child born from artificial insemination to be of
father: A child born from the use, with consent of the husband
and wife, of artificial insemination system from semen of any
other person shall be considered to have been born from the
married husband and his/her paternity shall be determined
accordingly.
110. To be according to court's decision: If a dispute arises as to
the maternity or paternity of a person, such a dispute shall be
settled as decided by the Court.
111. To obtain name and surname: (1) Each person shall, after
birth, obtain the name as designated by his/her mother or father
according to one’s own religion, culture, usage or tradition.
If the mother or father of a person is not available or
is not likely to be available, he/she shall obtain the name is
designated by the guardian taking care of him/her.
Each person shall, after birth, be entitled to use after
his/her name the surname designated with consent of his/her
father and mother or, failing to reach consent, the surname of
his/her father.
Provided that a child whose paternity is not traced out
shall be entitled to use after his/her name the surname of his/her
mother.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(3), a child may use the surname of his/her father or mother or
of both.
If a dispute arises as to the surname of a person,
he/she shall be considered, unless proved otherwise, to have
used the surname of his/her father.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a child whose father or mother or both are not
traced out shall be entitled to use after his/her name the surname
given by the guardian taking care of him/her.
112. Name of a mother, father, grand-father and grandmother
may be stated: (1) Where the name of a mother, father and
grand-father, grand-mother requires to be stated under a law in a
formal, legal act and proceedings or deed, the concerned person
shall be entitled to state the name of his/her mother, father and
grand-father, grand-mother.
Where the father of the person who has to state the
name of his/her mother, father and grand-father and grandmother pursuant to sub-section (1) is not traced out, he/she
may state the name of a mother and the father and grand-mother
of the mother, and where even the name of a mother is not
traced out, it shall be sufficient to state, by recording the same
statement, the name of guardian if he/she is a minor, and only
his/her name if he/she is a major.
113. Birth of child to be registered: (1) Where a child is born to a
spouse, the mother, father or both have to file an application
within forty five days of the birth before the authority specified
by Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette
or if such a specification is not made, before the concerned
Village Development Committee or Municipality, as the case
may be, for registration of the birth.
(2) If an application is filed for registration of a birth after
expiry of such a period, a charge of fifty rupees shall be
applicable.
If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned authority or the local body, as the case may be,
shall, after entering such details into the birth registration book
maintained according to law in its office, issue a certificate of
birth registration in the format as specified by the law to the
applicant.
In entering details in the registration book under
sub-section (3), there shall be entered the concerned child's
name, surname, birth date (year, month, date and day as well)
and place; name, surname and address of his/her mother, father.
The concerned authority or local authority, as the
case may be, shall have to forward the details entered, pursuant
to sub-section (3), into the registration book maintained in its
office up to the end of every month to the district administration
office, within a period of fifteen days of the first month
thereafter and the said office shall also enter such details up to
the end of every month into the birth registration book
maintained in its office for that purpose and forward the same
in every three months to the ministry specified by Government
of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(6) The concerned Ministry shall enter the details received
pursuant to sub-section (5) in the birth registration book
maintained for that purpose and maintain up dated description.
114. To care and maintain: (1) Every minor shall be cared and
maintained jointly by the mother and father.
(2) In caring and maintaining pursuant to sub-section (1),
the father and mother shall have to provide for, according to
their financial condition and capability, maintenance, health care,
education, sports, and entertainment and make other necessary
provisions.
115. To
under
custody
mother
father: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 114, where
matrimonial relationship between a husband and a wife is
lawfully dissolved, their minor child shall remain in the custody
of the mother or the father as provided herein below:-
in the case of a minor child below five years of age,
into the custody of a mother, if she so desires
irrespective of whether or not she has entered into a
second marriage;
in the case of a minor child above five years, except
where the mother concludes another marriage, in the
custody of a mother, if she so desires;
in other conditions, except in those referred to in
clause (a) or (b) , in custody of the father.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where the husband and the wife have entered a separate
agreement at the time of divorce or of judicial separation on
taking custody of a minor, such an agreement shall prevail over
the custody of a minor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), while deciding as to the custody of a child above the age of
ten years between the father and mother, the opinion of the
concerned child may also be sought.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the mother or the father, as the case may be,
under whose custody a minor is living, dies, the surviving
father or mother, as the case may be, shall have to take the
minor into his/her custody without any delay.
Provided that where the mother has already concluded
another marriage, she is not obliged to take a minor above five
years' age into her custody.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section,
where the husband and wife separated lawfully have a minor, the
maintenance, education, upbringing and heath care of such a
minor shall be according to the agreement concluded, if any,
between the husband and wife and in absence of such an
agreement, it shall be as follows:-
In the case of a minor below five years of age, it
shall be mother's responsibility,
In the case of a minor having attained the age of five
years, but not attained ten years, it shall be the
responsibility of the father;
In case of a minor attaining the age of ten years it
shall be the responsibility of the mother or father
with whom the child desires to live.
116. To take necessary care and provide maintenance: (1) The
father or mother, as the case may be, who takes a minor in
custody pursuant to Section 115 shall have to take care of and
provide maintenance to such a minor and in so taking care and
providing maintenance, the provisions referred to in sub-section
(2) of Section 114 shall be applicable mutatis mutandis.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where the income of the father or mother who does not take
custody of the child is higher than that of the father or mother
who takes custody of the child, such a mother or father shall
have to provide for the purpose of maintenance, education and
upbringing of such a minor, the expense as agreed upon between
such a father or mother and in absence of such agreement, as
specified by the court.
117. Facility to visit to be provided: (1)In cases where matrimonial
relationship is lawfully dissolved or the mother or father are
living separately, the minor shall be allowed to visit, from time
to time, the father if he/she is living in custody of a mother and
the mother if he/she is living in custody of the father or by the
consent of mother and father, to stay with either of them for
sometime.
Provided that if it appears that the interest of the minor is
likely to be prejudiced in availing the facility to such visit or
stay, the court may issue an order prohibiting such a visit or stay.
The frequency of visiting to or the period of staying
with the father or mother, as the case may be, pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as fixed by the concerned mother and father
in absence of such fixation, as ordered by the court.
During the stay of the minor with his/her father or
mother, as the case may be, pursuant to this Section, provisions
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 114 shall be applicable
mutatis mutandis..
118. Minor's rights to exist: (1) Notwithstanding the matrimonial
relationship between the husband and wife is dissolved pursuant
to this Chapter, the rights of a child born from them, over the
father, mother and the obligation of the father, mother to
him/her shall stand existed.
(2) Notwithstanding a person's biological father, mother
cannot become husband and wife in accordance with this
Chapter, such a person's legal right over such a father and
mother and the obligation of such a father, mother to such a
person shall stand existed.
119. Home not to be left without consent: (1) A child shall not,
without the consent of the parent, be entitled to live separately
from his/her parent.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), a child may live separately from the parent in the following
circumstances:-
If one is separated from the parent with or without
obtaining partition according to law,
If he/she concludes a marriage,
If she or he attains at least twenty two years of age,
If he/she is already employed.
120. Minor not to work as labor: A minor who is entitled to be
engaged in a work according to law as labor cannot work as
labor without the consent of the parent.
121. To be according to decision of father, mother: If a dispute
arises as to a matter to be decided in respect of the right and
interest of the minor born from the father, mother who cannot
conclude a marriage between them or whose matrimonial
relationship is dissolved pursuant to this Code, the decision
made by the father or mother, as the case may be, with whom
such a minor is living shall prevail.
122. A child to honor, respect and care mother, father: (1) Every
child shall have to treat his/her parent with honor and respect.
(2) Every child shall, according to his/her capacity, have
to provide necessary care, maintenance, medical treatment to
his/her parent notwithstanding living in an undivided family or
separately.
123. Limitation: If a separate time-limit has been specified in this
Chapter with regard to filing a statement of claims, it shall be
according to the same and in other cases, the person who is
aggrieved from an act carried out under this Chapter may file a
complaint within a period of six months from the date of
carrying out of such an act.

Chapter-5
Provision concerning Parental Authority
124. To be under supervision and control of the parent: (1) A
minor shall live under the supervision, oversight, control or
authority of parent.
The minor living under sub-section (1) shall have to
obey lawful order or direction given by parent.
125. Parental authority to be exercised jointly: (1) The parent who
may exercise the authority over, fulfill responsibility and
discharge duties towards their child pursuant to this Chapter
shall have to jointly exercise the authority and fulfill obligations
and discharge duty with the consent of both.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), the authority to be exercised, responsibility to be fulfilled
and duties to be discharged under the said sub-section shall be
exercised,
fulfilled
discharged
following
circumstances by the following father or mother, as the case
may be:-
If anyone among father or mother dies, by the
surviving mother or father;
If either the mother or father is of unsound mind, by
the mother or father of sound mind, during the
period of such state of mind;
Where the matrimonial relationship between the
mother, father is dissolved or they have been living
separate according to law, by the father, or mother
who has taken the minor under custody,
By the mother if the father of a minor is not traced
126. Power, responsibility and duty of the person exercising
parental authority: The power of, the responsibility to be
fulfilled and the duties to be discharged by the father or mother,
as the case may be, who is entitled to exercise parental authority
pursuant to this Chapter, shall be as follows:-
to keep the minor with him/her, provide company
and watch the minor's works, actions and behaviors;
to provide food and clothes and to teach him/her to
eat, wear and labor;
to provide affection and love;
to inculcate in him/her social dignity, decency,
good-behavior, morals, rites, culture, customs and to
educate him/her to behave accordingly;
to provide moral education like honesty, self
confidence, self-help, integrity, labor, discipline
based on social values;
to be careful of physical and mental health, to
provide and cause to be provided medical treatment;
to provide opportunity, according to necessity, for
sports and entertainment;
to make available read-worthy and message-oriented
educational materials;
to guide to remain loyal to the family, community,
society, nation and state;
to prevent from detrimental habits, bad association
and obscene matter;
to teach him/her to obey order, to honor and revere,
to do or cause to be done any act whatsoever
required for development of physical, mental and
intellectual personality.
127. Not to discriminate: The parent shall not discriminate in any
way in the maintenance, education and upbringing, sports,
medical treatment or entertainment facility of their children on
the grounds of son or daughter or between sons or between
daughters.
128. Special care to be taken: (1) If a child is physically or mentally
handicapped or disabled or has contracted a deadly disease such
as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Hepatitis B, the
parent shall have to take special care of and provide special
treatment and protection to such a child.
Explanation: for the purpose of this Chapter, the term
"physically or mentally handicapped" means a physically
or mentally impaired person who himself/herself is unable
or incapable to carryout daily work.
In order to make the child financially self-reliant in
the future by having arrangements for providing special medical
treatment under sub-section (1), the parent shall have to make,
according to their own financial conditions and capacity,
arrangements for imparting special education or training.
129. Disciplinary action may be taken: If the parent considers it
appropriate to take any disciplinary action against a minor child
living under their supervision, oversight, control or authority
pursuant to this Chapter to improve his/her behavior, habits and
conduct, such parent may take such disciplinary action.
Provided that a cruel, inhumane and torturous treatment
can not be made to a child.
130. Deemed to be authority to exercise power: If the parent
appoints a teacher for the education and upbringing of a child,
admit a child into an educational institute for acquiring
education, he/she shall be deemed to have given authority to the
teacher so appointed or the headmaster or teacher of such
institute to exercise the power under Section 129 in respect of
education and upbringing.
131. Other person too may exercise parental power: Where a
minor is living with the guardian for reason of death of both the
mother and the father, a mother concludes another marriage
following the death of the father or both the father and the
mother become a person of unsound mind, his/her guardian may
exercise the authority, fulfill the responsibility and discharge the
duty, to be exercised, fulfilled and discharged by the parent
under this Chapter.
132. Restriction may be imposed to exercise parental authority: If
a complaint filed by a person or a child welfare organization
incorporated pursuant to law specifying that the person entitled
to exercise the authority has committed the following act against
a minor is proved from an inquiry, the court may prevent such a
person from exercising such authority:-
if cruel, inhumane or torturous punishment is
inflicted or treated;
if a child is neglected or disregarded or abused from
time to time;
if a child is employed into immoral or sexual
vocation;
if a child is employed in a work likely to endanger
body, life or health;
if loss to him/her is caused by expending his/her
property, against his/her interest or such property is
sold with the intention of buying oneself later on;
if a child is induced to become a Sanyasi, monk or
fakir;
if a child is employed to begging, except in cases
while observing religious or cultural rites, or
if one is employed in a work to be constituted
offense under law.
Where a restriction is imposed pursuant to subsection (1), the court shall have to appoint a guardian according
to law authorizing him/her to exercise the parental authority as
regard such a minor.
Where a guardian is appointed pursuant to subsection (2) to exercise parental authority such a guardian may
exercise the parental authority under this Chapter in consonance
with the interest of a minor.
If the person who is prevented from exercising the
parental authority pursuant to sub-section (1) files a petition
before the court promising that he/she shall not repeat the act
referred to in the said sub-section, the court may remove the
restriction imposed upon him/her and revoke the appointment
under sub-section (2).
133. Parental authority to terminate: (1) The parental authority to
which the parent are entitled to exercise pursuant to this Chapter
over a child shall be deemed to have been terminated in the
following circumstances:-
if the minor attains the age of eighteen years,
he/she
lives
separately
after
getting
employment.
Provided that where a child is physically or mentally
handicapped, the parental authority over him/her shall, except in
cases where he/she is living separately by concluding a marriage,
shall not be terminated.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), except as provided for in this Chapter, the relation, duty,
liability and responsibility of mother and father and son and
daughter towards each other shall stand existed for life long.
134. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-6
Provision concerning Guardianship
135. To be considered a guardian: A person appointed or liable
under this Chapter to protect the rights, interest of an
incompetent or a quasi-competent person shall be considered to
be a guardian.
136. Priority order of guardian: (1) Subject to other Sections of
this Chapter, a person of the following priority order shall, ipso
facto, be a guardian of an incompetent or a quasi-incompetent
person:-
a husband or wife of undivided family;
a father or mother;
a son, widow daughter-in-law, unmarried daughter;
a separated husband or wife;
a separated son, widow daughter-in-law, unmarried
daughter;
a grand-father or grand-mother;
a grand-son or unmarried grand-daughter;
(h) a grand-father, grand mother on mother's parent side,
maternal uncle, maternal aunty,
an elder or younger brother or an unmarried elder or
younger sister;
a married grand-daughter;
a married elder or younger sister.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1) the following person shall be a guardian in the following
conditions:-
where there are more than one person in one
priority order eligible to be a guardian, the person
mutually agreed by them, and in absence of such an
agreement, the person designated by the court.
in the case of a person of sound mind and having
attained the age of fourteen years, a person of
his/her choice.
Provided that in so choosing a guardian, a
deed thereof shall be executed and be certified by
the court.
in the case of a minor of a spouse whose
matrimonial relationship is dissolved, the father or
mother who provides maintenance cost to him/her,
if a person of first priority order declines to be a
guardian or does not act in the capacity of a guardian,
the person of the following priority order shall act in
that capacity.
Provided that if a person of lower order is so
becomes a guardian, he/she shall have to certify
from the court of the fact that he/she is a guardian.
137. Other person to be considered a guardian: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136, where a guardianship to an
incompetent or a quasi-incompetent person is provided by a
person other than the one referred to in that Section, the person
so providing guardianship shall be considered to be a guardian
of such a person.
Provided that the person to be so guardian shall have to
cause the fact of being a guardian to be certified from the court.
138. Organization to be considered a guardian: (1) If a child living
in organization such as child welfare house, orphanage or
children's organization established with the object of the welfare
and protection of the interest of children who has not a guardian,
such an organization itself shall be considered to be a guardian.
Any act to be done on behalf of such a child shall be
done by the chief of such an organization.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter and Chapter -
7, "Chief" means the chief executive officer of that organization
or the chairperson, general manager, managing director or any
other officer acting in that capacity.
139. Guardian may be appointed by a court: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136 or 137, the court may, in any
of the following circumstances, appoint a particular person as
guardian, specifying reasons therefor:-
If the concerned local body files a petition to
appoint a guardian in case a person declines to be a
guardian pursuant to Section 136;
If a concerned person files a petition before the
court to appoint a guardian.
In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall have to consider whether or not the rights,
interest or protection of such an incompetent or quasi-competent
person may be secured.
In appointing a guardian in the circumstances
referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall have to obtain the
consent also of the person to be appointed as a guardian.
After appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall have to give a written notice thereof to the
person to be a guardian and the local body.
140. Supervisor may be designated: (1) Where a guardian is
appointed by a court pursuant to Section 139, the court may, if it
considers necessary to inquire the act and activities of such a
guardian, designate a person as supervisor.
The supervisor designated pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall inquire the act and action of the guardian and submit a
report thereof to the court.
Where guardianship is terminated pursuant to

Section 148, supervisoryship shall also, ipso facto, be deemed to
be terminated.
141. Disqualifications for a guardian: None of the following
persons may become a guardian:-
an incompetent or a quasi-competent person;
a person who has committed an act against rights
and interest of an incompetent or a quasiincompetent person;
a person sentenced by a court of imprisonment for
three years or more.
Provided that this clause shall not be deemed
to cause obstruction for being the guardian of the
husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grand-mother, grand-son, grand-daughter,
brothers and sisters.
a person considered disqualified by the court to be a
guardian.
142. Maintenance and care of incompetent or quasi-competent
person: (1) The guardian shall have to make arrangement for
the maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care of
incompetent
quasi-competent
person
under
his/her
guardianship from the property of such a person, if any, and if
not; from the property of the guardian himself/herself.
(2) The arrangements for maintenance, health, education,
entertainment and care of the an incompetent or quasi-competent
person pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be made from the
movable property of such a person, if any; and where there is no
such property or the property to make arrangements for the
maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care is not
sufficient, his/her immovable property may be sold with the
prior-approval of court.
Provided that such an approval shall not be required to sell
immovable property where the husband, wife, father, mother,
son, daughter, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, or granddaughter is a guardian.
143. To supervise, protect and manage property: (1) A guardian
shall have to supervise and protect the property of the
incompetent
quasi-competent
person
under
his/her
guardianship.
A guardian may carry on any business or transaction
by investing the property of the person under his/her
guardianship.
144. To keep exact books and accounts: (1) A guardian shall have
to keep exact books and accounts of the expenditure incurred on
the maintenance, health, education, and care of an incompetent
or quasi-competent person under his/her guardianship, and of
the income and expenditure from the management of such a
person's property and the inventory proving the ownership of
such property.
Provided that where a husband, wife, father, mother, son,
daughter, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, grand/daughter
is the guardian of the incompetent or quasi-competent person,
such books and account shall not be required to be maintained.
The guardian shall have to submit the books and
accounts and the inventory proving ownership of property kept
pursuant to sub-selection (1) within one year from the date of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person having attained
majority lawfully or notified in writing the court that he/she is
competent to carry out act and activities, to such a person.
If an incompetent or quasi-competent person dies at
the time when he/she was under guardianship, the guardian shall
have to submit the books and accounts and the inventory
proving ownership of such property under sub-section (1)
within six months from his/her death, to the nearest of a
successor of such person.
145. Legal proceedings may be instituted or suit may be
defended: A guardian may for protection of rights, interest of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person under one's own
guardianship, institute a legal proceeding against a person or
defend a suit filed against him/her.
Provided that the guardian cannot so renounce a claim of
or plea to or to execute deed of compromise in a civil suit to
which an incompetent or quasi-competent person is claimant or
defendant as to cause a loss to him/her from which he/she shall
be aggrieved.
146. Act may be carried out on behalf of incompetent or quasicompetent person: Subject to the provisions contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, the guardian may carry out an act on
behalf of an incompetent or quasi-competent person that he/she
can carry out according to law.
147. Act may be carried out subject to only to terms:
Notwithstanding anything contained in other Section of this
Chapter, where a person is designated a guardian for an
incompetent or quasi-competent person with specification of
certain terms, such a guardian shall have the authority to carry
out only the act under such terms.
148. Termination of guardianship: Guardianship shall be deemed to
be terminated in any of the following circumstances:-
if a petition filed by the guardian stating that he/she
is unable to be a guardian is accepted by court;
if the guardian or the incompetent or quasicompetent person under guardianship dies;
if the incompetent or quasi-competent person
becomes competent;
if the court removes the guardian at the request of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person under
guardianship.
If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to subsection (1) and the person who was a guardian and the person
who was under guardianship are surviving, the person who had
worked as guardian shall have to continue to maintain and take
care of the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his/her
guardianship until another guardian is appointed.
Where a guardianship is terminated pursuant to subsection (1), the limitation, time of a legal proceedings or time
for appearance, to be carried out by the guardian pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be deemed to have elapsed, from the date on
which guardianship so terminated until next guardian is
appointed.
149. Not to be transferred to a successor: Where a guardianship is
terminated upon death of a guardian pursuant to Section 148, the
right, authority and responsibility vested in him/her in the
capacity of a guardian shall not be transferred to his/her
successor.
Provided that in cases where another guardian requires to
be appointed for an incompetent or quasi-competent person,
he/she shall, in the capacity of the successor to the guardian,
have to maintain and take care of such incompetent or quasicompetent person until another guardian is appointed.
150. Expense may be recovered: Where a guardian has arranged
from his/her own property the maintenance, health, education,
sports, entertainment and care of the incompetent or quasicompetent person living under his/her guardianship, he/she may
recover the money so incurred from the property of the
incompetent or quasi-competent person remained under his/her
guardianship.
Provided that if the husband, wife, father, mother, son,
daughter, grand-father, grand-mother or grand-son or granddaughter is a guardian of the incompetent or quasi-competent
person, he/she shall not recover such expense.
151. Amount of loss may be recovered: If a guardian knowingly,
deceitfully, fraudulently or with malafide intention, causes loss
to the property of the incompetent or quasi-competent person
remained under his/her guardianship so as to be or not to be
benefited himself or herself, the incompetent or quasi-competent
person aggrieved from such a loss may recover the amount of
loss from such a guardian.
152. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-7
Provision concerning Curatorship
153. To be curator of minor: (1) Where the father and mother both
of a minor die or become insane or have disappeared or are
living
abroad
without
making
arrangements
proper
maintenance, care, supervision of the minor, and if such a minor
does not have a guardian according to Chapter 6, the person who
has taken custody of such a minor shall be required to act in the
capacity of the curator of such a minor, until the minor attains
the age of majority.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter:-
Where there is no information whether a person is
alive or dead from three months consecutively or a
person to whom it is natural to receive information
about
person
received
information about such a person during that period
or except in cases where information about him/her
is received, such a person shall be deemed to be
disappeared.
If a person visits a foreign country for three months
or more, he/she shall be deemed to live in a foreign
country.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a person may appoint a separate curator for
maintenance and care of his/her child.
154. Curator of a person of unsound mind: (1) Where a person of
unsound mind does not have a guardian under Chapter-6, a
person may act as a curator for maintenance, care of such a
person and for management of his/her property.
Where there is no person under sub-section (1) or
the person is not ascertained, the person under whose custody,
supervision or oversight the person of unsound mind is living
for the time being, shall be a curator of such a person.
155. Mother to become curator of a minor: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 153, in cases where the father of a
minor below the age of ten years is dead or disappeared or is in
abroad, such minor's mother herself shall be his/her curator even
through she has concluded a second marriage.
156. Body corporate could be a curator: (1) If an orphan child or a
person of unsound mind having no guardian remains under
supervision, protection or custody of a body corporate, such a
body corporate shall be a curator of such a person.
Where a body corporate is curator pursuant to subsection (1), the person working as executive chief of such body
corporate shall exercise the authority of a curator.
157. Court may appoint curator: (1) Where there is no person who
could be a curator according to Chapter-6 of this Part or a
person declines to be a curator, the concerned local body shall
file a petition stating the details thereof before the court to
appoint a curator of the concerned person.
In filing petition pursuant to sub-section (1), there
shall be stated the name, surname, address and profession of the
persons likely to be a curator of the concerned person and a
document of the consent given by the person likely to be a
curator to work as curator.
Where a petition is filed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall issue an order for appointing an appropriate
person out of the persons whose names are submitted pursuant
to sub-section (2).
A person to be appointed a curator pursuant to subsection (3) shall have to submit a deed of consent to work in that
capacity before the court.
158. Curator's qualifications: A natural person who is capable to
conclude a contract pursuant to this Code and is not bankrupt or
a legal person which is in operation after being registered
pursuant to a law may be a curator.
159. Curator to take custody of property: (1) A person who
becomes a curator pursuant to this Chapter shall have to take
custody of, manage and operate movable and immovable
property.
A person who takes custody of property pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall have to maintain, provide medical
treatment and educate the person whom he/she has taken into
custody according to his/her capacity from the property he/she
has taken into custody.
160. Property may be used: A person who becomes a curator may
expend all the returns obtained from the property under his/her
curatorship for the maintenance, education and interest of the
person whom he/she has taken into his/her custody.
161. Immovable property may be expended by court's approval:
(1) Where the movable property of the person living under
curatorship is insufficient for the maintenance, education or
medical treatment of such a person, the person who becomes a
curator may file petition for permission of the court for sale for
that purpose, of immovable property, specifying reasons therefor.
Where a petition is filed pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the court may, if it finds the grounds for sale of such immovable
property reasonable, grant permission to sell the immovable
property or a part thereof in accordance with the conditions as it
considers appropriate.
162. Property to be managed rationally and carefully: (1) A
person who becomes a curator shall have to take reasonable care
of the property under his/her curatorship, in good faith like that
of his/her own property and operate and manage it rationally and
carefully.
The concerned curator shall be responsible for any
loss or damage caused to the property under curatorship for
reasons of not having operated and managed property pursuant
to sub-Section (1).
Provided that he/she shall not be responsible for loss or
damage of such property due to natural calamities.
If a complaint is filed of not having operated and
managed property pursuant to sub-Section (1), the court may
remove the concerned person from curatorship.
163. Transfer of title may be annulled: If a curator sells to
himself/herself or any member of his/her family the immovable
property of the person living under his/her custody with
malafide intention of depriving such a person of his/her title or
except in cases where succession is devolved within three years
of the date of sale, the title transferred in any way to such
person's name, may be annulled.
164. Curatorship to be terminated: (1) Curatorship shall be
deemed to have been terminated in the following conditions:-
In case of a minor, if he/she attains the age of
eighteen years,
In case of a person of unsound mind, if he/she
becomes sane,
In case the mother, father of the minor or both take
minor into their custody,
In case a guardian is appointed for a minor or person
of unsound mind;
In case the person disappeared is found,
In case a court removes a person from curatorship
pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section 162.
In case the mother, father of the minor who are in
abroad return,
In case a curator is not qualified or no more
qualified pursuant to Section 158;
In case the curator or the person giving curatorship
dies.
Where curatorship is terminated pursuant to sub Section (1), the person who used to be a curator shall promptly
return to the concerned person the property taken into custody in
the capacity of a curator.
165. Property may be handed over: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person is personally
unable to protect and manage property under his/her title,
ownership or possession for the reason that he/she has to go
elsewhere by leaving the place where he/she resides, he/she may
appoint an agent therefor and entrust such property to such a
person.
166. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter -8
Provision concerning Adoption
167. To be deemed adopted son or adopted daughter: If a person
accepts a son or daughter of another person as his/her son or
daughter, such a son or daughter shall be deemed to be an
adopted son or daughter.
168. Adoption not to be effected contrary to right and interest of
child: No person shall effect adoption contrary to rights and
interests of a child.
169. Prohibition on adoption by a person having child: (1) No
person having his/her own son shall adopt a son and no person
having his/her own daughter shall adopt a daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), if a man or woman who is living separately by the reason of
judicial separation, by receiving partition in property or by
separating bread and board from the husband or wife, as the case
may be, and does not have a biological child, such a person may
adopt a child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter and Chapter
9, "judicial separation" means a circumstance under which
a person obtains partition in property according to the
order of court or lives separately according to law or lives
separately after separation of bread and board from other
coparceners.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1) or (2), if a person having biological child files a petition
before the court for adoption of another children disclosing
therein his/her financial capacity to make arrangements for their
maintenance, health care, education and care and if the
statement of petitioner is found to be reasonable upon inquiry
into such a petition, the court may grant permission for adoption.
170. Adoption may be effected: (1) The following person may effect
adoption of a child:-
A spouse to whom no child has born even up to ten
years of the marriage,
An unmarried woman having completed forty five
years of age, a widow, a divorcee woman or a
woman living separately following a judicial
separation, having no son or daughter.
An unmarried man having completed forty five years
of age a widower, divorcee or judicially separated
man, having no son or daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), the following person cannot effect adoption:-
One who is of unsound mind,
One who is convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude from a court or
One who does not have financial capacity to
afford maintenance, health care, education,
sports facility, entertainment and care of
children.
The husband and wife of an undivided family shall
effect adoption with each other's consent.
171. Adoption not to be effected: (1) No one shall effect adoption
of any of the following persons:-
One who completes fourteen years of age;
One who is the only son or daughter;
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
the circumstance referred to in sub-Section (2) of

Section 173,
One who is adopted for once;
Provided that this provision shall not apply
where the adoption is annulled according to law;
One who is in the higher degree of relationship than
the person adopting the son or daughter;
One who is a non-Nepali citizen.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of
sub-Section (1) in the case of a person within the relation of
three generations or the child born to the ex-husband of the wife,
adoption may be effected even though the person has completed
the age of fourteen years.
172. Difference of age between adopter and adoptee: There must
be at least the age difference of twenty five years between the
adopting and adopted person.
173. Consent to be sought for adoption: (1) In effecting adoption of
a child consent of both the father and the mother of the child
shall have to be obtained in writing, if both of them are
surviving; and consent of the surviving father or mother, s the
case may be, shall have to be obtained if either of them is
surviving.
Provided that where the matrimonial relationship between
the husband and the wife is dissolved or the husband and wife
are living separately by receiving partition of property or by
separation of bread and board from other coparceners, adoption
may be effected by obtaining consent of the person with whom,
out of the father or mother, the child has been living.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), adoption of a child whose father and mother are not traced
or surviving or a child whose father and mother are surviving
but who has been maintained or cared by a person or
organization following the solemnization of another marriage
either by father or mother may be effected by obtaining consent
in writing of the person or organization so maintaining or caring
a child.
While adopting the child above ten years pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (2), a written consent of such a child shall
also have to be obtained.
The written consent under sub-Section (3) shall be
executed by the concerned child in the presence of his/her father,
mother or the guardian exercising parental authority.
Before obtaining consent pursuant to this Section,
the person putting the child up for adoption and the child shall
be informed of the meaning, legal status and consequences of
the adoption.
No financial inducement of any type shall be given
in obtaining consent pursuant to this Section and such consent
shall have to be given voluntarily.
174. Adoption deemed to have been effected by spouse: Where
adoption was effected by a husband or a wife living separately
after obtaining partition in property or by separation of bread
and board from other coparceners or judicial separation and the
husband and wife live jointly after effecting adoption, the
adoption effected before living so jointly shall be deemed to
have been effected by both the spouse.
175. Court to give order for adoption: (1) If a person is desirous of
effecting adoption of a child, he/she shall have to file a petition
before a concerned court along with a duly executed deed of
adoption.
If, upon inquiring into the deed received pursuant to
sub-Section (1), the court deems it appropriate to grant
permission to the petitioner for adoption, the court shall have to
issue an order granting permission for adoption and shall
authenticate such a deed.
If the court considers from the inquiry conducted
pursuant to sub-Section (2) that it is not appropriate to grant
permission to the petitioner for adoption, the court shall issue an
order accordingly and give information thereof to the petitioner.
176. Rights and authority of adopted child: (1) The rights, powers,
obligations and responsibility of an adopted child shall be equal
to that of the biological son or daughter of the adoptive parents.
Even if a child is born to a person who has already
adopted a person, the status of such adopted child as equal to
that of the biological child shall not be prejudiced.
177. Surname of adopted child: (1) An adopted child may use the
surname of the adoptive father or mother or of the both.
Provided that:
If an adopted child so desires, he/she may use the
surname also of his/her biological father and mother.
If the adoption is revoked, the surname of the person
previously adopted shall revert to the surname of
his/her biological father or mother.
178. Prohibition on claiming in share of property of father and
mother: An adopted person shall be entitled to make a claim of
a share of property of his/her biological father, mother.
Provided that,-
Where adoption is revoked, he/she may claim
partition in property of his/her biological father,
mother,
Where he/she has already received partition in
property at the time of adoption, he/she may receive
such property as well.
179. Adopter's obligation: (1) The obligation of the person adopting
a child shall be the following:-
To make arrangements for maintenance, health care
sports, entertainment and proper education of the
adopted child according to his/her reputation and
capacity as if he/she were his/her own child;
To protect rights and interests of the adopted child.
To exercise parental authority as referred to in

Chapter-5 of this Part.
If the person adopting a child does not fulfill the
obligations under sub-Section (1), the adopted child may live
separately by obtaining a partition share of property.
180. Obligation of adopted child: The obligation of an adopted
child shall be as follows:-
To make, arrangements for maintenance, health care
and care of adoptive father, mother according to
his/her reputation and capacity;
To protect, look after and properly manage property
of the adoptive parent;
To protect the rights and interest of the adoptive
parent.
181. Facility to visit and making correspondences to be provided:
The adoptive parent shall have to provide facility to the adopted
child to visit to or make correspondence with his/her biological
father, mother from time to time.
182. Adoption to be Void: If a person effects adoption in
contravention of Section 169, sub-Section (1) and clauses (a)
and (b) of sub-Section (2) of Section 170 and Sections 171, 172
and 173, such an adoption shall ipso facto be void.
183. Voidable Adoption: (1) In cases where a person adopting a
child fails to fulfill the obligations referred to in Section 179,
the adopted child may cause the adoption to be void.
Provided that where such adopted child has already
received partition share of property, he/she shall not be entitled
to cause the adoption to be void.
(2) A the person adopting a child may cause the adoption
to be void in any of the following circumstances:-
If the adopted child fails to fulfill the obligations
referred to in Section 180;
If the adopted child expels him/her from home or
causes physical or mental torture from time to time;
If the adopted child abuses his/her property, or
If the adopted child lives separately without his/her
consent for three years or more, deserting the
adopted person.
The provisions referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of
sub-Section (2) shall not be applicable in case of the married
adopted daughter.
184. Termination of adoption: (1) If an adoption becomes void
pursuant to Section 182 or 183, the relationship between the
person adopting a child and the adopted child shall be deemed to
have been terminated.
If the relationship between the person adopting a
child and adopted child is terminated pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the rights, authority and obligation vested in the adopted child in
that capacity shall also be terminated.
Provided that the facility enjoyed, authority acquired or
exercised and obligation fulfilled during the validity period of
adoption shall not be prejudiced.
185. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out pursuant
to this Chapter may file a complaint within one year from the
date of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter -9
Provision concerning inter-country adoption
186. Provision concerning inter-country adoption to be deemed
established: If any foreigner accepts a child of Nepali citizen
or of a foreigner residing in Nepal as an adopted son or an
adopted daughter, it shall be deemed to be a provision of an
inter-country adoption.
187. Adoption not to be effected without obtaining permission:
No foreigner shall be allowed to effect adoption of any
child of any Nepali citizen or of a foreigner residing in Nepal
without obtaining a permission from Government of Nepal.
Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only to the citizen or spouse of those countries which
are opened by Government of Nepal by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette for inter-country adoption in Nepal.
188. Greater interest of a child to be considered in granting
permission for adoption: (1) Before granting a permission to a
foreigner for effecting adoption, Government of Nepal shall
have to consider whether or not the best interest of the child will
be secured, his/her human rights will be protected and such
child will be abducted, sold, trafficked or abused otherwise.
While considering the matters pursuant to sub Section (1), permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only if it is found to be appropriate to grant a permission
to a foreigner to adopt a child.
189. Permission may be granted for adoption: Permission may be
granted to a foreigner to adopt any of the following children
who has stayed in a children home at least for a period of ninety
days:-
An orphan child,
A voluntarily abandoned child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
"Children home" means a child welfare home and
orphanage
established
objective
protecting rights and interests of children and
includes the children home or balmandir (children
house) established by Government of Nepal.
"Orphan child" means any of the following children
who is certified as an orphan from the District
Administration Office:-
1) An unclaimed child found by the police,
2) An unclaimed child found in a hospital or a
health organization,
3) A child either of whose parents is not traced
out, or
4) A child whose both parents are dead and who
possesses
property
maintenance.
"Voluntarily abandoned child" means any of the
following children surrendered to the custody of a
children home through the District Administration
Office, after failing to make arrangements for their
maintenance and education by any of the following
persons by executing a deed relating thereto:-
in the case of a child whose father is dead or
disappeared and mother has concluded another
marriage, by such a mother,
in cases where, due to birth of more than one
child,
their
maintenance,
education
financially unaffordable, by the father and the
mother.
in the cases of a child, who is born in more
than one number, whose father is dead or is
disappeared or is of unsound mind, and
his/her mother can not financially afford
his/her maintenance and education, by such a
mother.
in the cases of a child, who is born in more
than one number, mother is dead or of
unsound mind and the father can not
financially afford his/her maintenance, by the
father of such a child.
in the case of an orphan child who has no
property, by the guardian.
190. Foreigner eligible for adopting a son or daughter: (1) The
following foreigner may be granted permission for adoption of a
child of Nepalese citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal:-
A spouse to whom child is not born even up to ten
years of their marriage,
A woman who has completed forty-five years but
has not completed fifty five years of age, a widow,
divorcee or judicially separated woman having no
child,
A man who has completed forty-five years but has
not completed fifty five years, a widower, divorcee
or judicially separated man having no child.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), a foreigner of the following conditions shall not be granted
permission for adoption:-
One who is of unsound mind,
One who has been convicted of an offense
involving moral turpitude from a court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where a foreign country's law permits the citizen of that
country to adopt more than one child, he/she may adopt a child
even though he/she has a child.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a citizen of the country where Nepalese citizen is
forbidden to adopt a child or where the right of the adopted
child and naturally born child are discriminatory, citizen of such
a country is not permitted to adopt a child in Nepal.
(5) There shall be the difference of age of at least
twenty five years between the foreign couple, woman or man
under sub-Section (1) and the child to be adopted.
191. Provision concerning Inter-country Adoption Board: In
order to act as a central agency for the recommendation for
granting a permission to a foreigner for adoption of a child
pursuant to this Chapter, Government of Nepal shall, by a
notification published in the Nepal Gazette, form an Intercountry Adoption Board.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter "Board"
means the Inter-country Adoption Board.
(2) The functions, powers and duties of the Board, in
addition to those referred to elsewhere in this Chapter, shall be
as follows:-
To frame and recommend to Government of Nepal
policy on inter-country adoption,
coordinate
various
agencies
matters
of inter-country adoption,
To prevent undue financial and other advantage
likely to be exchanged while giving for adoption
and while adopting;
To collect and protect information relating to
children and persons desirous for adoption and
exchange such information to each other;
To make the procedures for effecting adoption
easier and simplified,
To share with central agencies or organizations of
other countries on procedures and experience with
regard to giving for adoption and adopting a child;
To make available any information required by
central adoption agency or the concerned other
public agency of other countries about the
condition of adopted son or daughter;
To prevent child abuse, exploitation, trafficking or
kidnapping likely to happen in effecting adoption
and to protect Nepali children from any other
practice likely to harm children;
To make recommendation to Government of Nepal
to fix the charges applicable for adoption;
To specify the format of application to be filed for
adoption,
arrangements
maintaining
confidentially
records
children,
their
biological father, mother or adoptive father,
mother;
To carry out such other functions relating to intercountry adoption as may be required.
Other matters including the procedures relating to
meeting of the Board shall be as determined by the Board itself.
192. Children home to be listed: A children home being operated
upon registration pursuant to law and desirous of carrying out
the business relating to inter-country adoption shall have to file
a petition accompanied by the following documents and details
before the Board :-
Statute of children home and document
relating to renewal thereof,
A recommendation made by the Central Child
Welfare Board to the effect that the children
home is operated and managed in accordance
with the specified minimum standard and
guidelines,
Details of the physical property of the children
home.
The Board shall, if it deems the request of the
applicant reasonable upon an inquiry on the petition received
pursuant to sub-Section (1), enlist such a home as an
organization authorized to carry out the business of intercountry adoption and notify the applicant.
A children’s home shall get it renewed from the
Board in every two years to maintain its registration.
193. Suspension or removal of a children home from list: (1) If a
children home is found to have submitted false statement,
committed or is about to commit an act in contravention of law
or this Chapter, the Board may suspend, by specifying period or
remove such children home from the list.
Provided that before suspending or removing from the list,
the home shall not be deprived of an opportunity to defend itself.
194. To forward details of children to selection committee: A
children home shall forward to the selection committee under

Section 198 individual personal details and documents stated
herein below about a the children who may be granted for
adoption to a foreigner and provide a notice thereof to the
Board:-
Name and recently taken photograph of children;
Health report of last six months of the children;
In the case of a Nepali children, the document
revealing that his/her domestic adoption within the
country failed despite making a reasonable efforts
for it,
In the case of an orphan,-
In the case of an unclaimed child found in a
road, street or public place, the letter issued by
the concerned police stating the same, if found
in unclaimed condition in a hospital, the letter
issued by the concerned hospital stating the
reason for leaving the child in the hospital and
if found in other places, a letter, including a
public inquiry document, issued by the nearby
police office;
A proof of a notice with thirty five days' time
having been published on a daily newspaper
of national level within seven days of
admission of a child as regards the claim of
child together with the photograph of the
child including the statement of the date of
admission of child, approximate age;
Where no claim is made over or information is
received about the said child from any person
within the period referred to in sub-clause (2),
poof of a notice with twenty one days time
having been published, after ten days' of
expiry of the period referred to in sub-clause
(2), containing the same statements,
A document issued by the concerned District
Administration Office certifying such a child
as an orphan, on the ground that no claim or
information was received even within the
period under sub-clause (3) or that the claim
or information received was baseless.
In the case of a voluntarily abandoned child,-
Certificate of birth registration,
Age and identifying mark of the child,
Name, address of the father, mother or other
guardians of the child and copy of their
citizenship certificates,
If the child is abandoned by a guardian other
than mother, father, document of appointment
of such a guardian,
Reason for abandonment of a child,
A recommendation made by the concerned
local body revealing the economic and social
conditions of the parent of the child,
Consent as stated in Section 173.
195. Listing of foreign organization or agency: (1) A foreign
organization or an agency desirous of carrying business relating
to inter-country adoption in Nepal shall have to file an
application accompanied by the following documents, before the
Board for listing of such an agency:-
Proof of having obtained approval from the
concerned body of the country of its incorporation to
carry out business relating to inter-country adoption,
A document which certifies that under the law of the
concerned country the status of an adopted son and
adopted daughter, as the case may be, is equal to
that of a biological son and daughter of a citizen of
that country,
A document which certifies that it has been carrying
out business relating to inter-country adoption at
least from three years,
A recommendation made by the embassy of the
concerned country accredited to Nepal or the
responsible body of the concerned country to the
effect that it has been working reliably in the field of
inter-country adoption, and
Other necessary document specified from time to
time by the Board.
If, from inquiry into the application received
pursuant to sub-Section (1), the Board finds the request of the
applicant is reasonable, it shall list such a foreign organization
or agency as an organization authorized to carry out business
relating to inter-country adoption and give a notice thereof to
the applicant.
A foreign organization or agency listed pursuant to
sub-Section (3) shall have to appoint its agent in Nepal and give
a notice thereof to the Board.
A foreign organization or agency listed pursuant to
sub-Section (2) shall, if it so desires, be required to renew in
every two year.
196. Foreign organization or agency may be suspended or
removed from list: (1) If a foreign organization or an agency
listed pursuant to Section 195 is found to have committed an
act in contravention of laws in force, this Chapter or the
direction of the Board, the Board may suspend, by specifying
period, or remove from the list such an organization or agency.
Provided that before so suspending or removing from list,
such an organization or agency shall not be deprived of an
opportunity to defend itself.
197. Application to be filed for adoption: (1) A foreigner or spouse
qualified under Section 190 and desirous of adopting a Nepali
child or of a child of a foreigner residing in Nepal shall have to
file an application before the Board, accompanied by the
following documents, through a foreign organization or agency
listed pursuant to Section 195 or the embassy of his/her country
in Nepal and where no such an embassy exists in Nepal, the
embassy designated for Nepal:-
applicant's birth registration certificate,
applicant's recently taken photograph,
photocopy of applicant's passport,
(d) a deed certifying the marital status of the applicant;
a certificate issued by a registered medical doctor as
regards the health of the applicant;
a certificate issued by the governmental body of the
concerned country to the effect that applicant bears
good characteristics and is not convicted guilty
from a court in a criminal charge involving moral
turpitude;
A document that certifies applicant's property and
income source;
applicant's social, psychological home study report,
age, sex and other details of the child sought for
adoption;
A consent letter issued by the government of his/her
country for adoption from Nepal;
(k) A guarantee letter issued by the government of the
concerned country or the embassy of that country in
Nepal or designated for Nepal to the effect that
under the law of the country of the applicant the
status of the child is equal to that of his/her own
biological child,
A guarantee letter issued by the government of the
applicant's home country, embassy of that country in
Nepal or the embassy designated for Nepal to the
effect that under the law of the country of the
applicant, he/she is fit for effecting adoption and has
the capacity to bear all responsibility including
maintenance, health care, education and protection
of the child to be adopted.
The document under sub-Section (1) shall be written
in English language or translated into English language by
an authorized body.
If it is found, from an inquiry into the application
received pursuant to sub-Section (1), that it is
appropriate to grant a permission for adoption
according to the request of the applicant, the Board
shall forward, by keeping confident the name and
address of the applicant, the details relating thereto
to the Selection Committee.
198. Provision concerning Selection Committee: For the purpose of
making recommendation as to which child shall be fit for
adoption by which foreigner, after matching the person desirous
of adoption and the child, Government of Nepal shall form a
selection committee by a notification published in the Nepal
Gazette.
199. To make recommendation by matching person effecting
adoption and child: After matching fitness of the applicant for
adoption and the child on the basis of the description relating to
the applicant received pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section
197, details relating to the child received pursuant to Section
194 and having regard also to the request of the applicant, the
selection committee shall recommend the name of the applicant
and the child before the Board.
200. Permissions to be granted for adoption: (1) If the Board finds,
from an inquiry into the recommendation received pursuant to

Section 199, appropriate to grant any child for adoption by a
foreigner, it shall recommend Government of Nepal accordingly.
(2) If Government of Nepal finds, from an inquiry, the
content of the recommendation made by the Board pursuant to
sub-Section (1) reasonable, it may grant a permission to the
applicant foreigner for adoption of such a child, according to the
recommendation of the Board.
(3) After a permission that has been granted pursuant to
sub-Section (2), Government of Nepal shall issue a certificate
relating thereto for that purpose.
(4) After a certificate has been issued pursuant to sub Section (3), inter-country adoption shall be deemed to have duly
been effected from Nepal.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
if the father, mother or guardian of the concerned child desires
to take back, prior to granting permission to foreigner for
adoption, his/her child, such a child may not be granted for
adoption.
If Government of Nepal grants a permission to a
foreigner pursuant to sub-Section (2) for adoption, the applicant
shall takeover the concerned child by being present personally.
Provided that if the applicant is a spouse and one of them
is unable to be present personally, the other may takeover the
child on the basis of the deed of consent executed by the absent
husband or wife, as the case may be.
(7) After permission is granted to a foreigner for adoption
of any child, Government of Nepal shall have to provide
information thereof to the central agency for inter-country
adoption of the country of the adoptive parent and also to the
embassy of the concerned country designated for Nepal, if any.
(8) A children home listed pursuant to Section 192, a
foreign organization or an agency listed pursuant to Section 195
or a foreigner or spouse having applied for adoption may file an
appeal before the Appellate Court designated by the Government
of Nepal by a notification published in the Nepal Gazette, if not
satisfied with a decision of Government of Nepal.
201. Special provision concerning selection of family for child
requiring special care: (1) Notwithstanding any thing
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the Board may prioritize
the families submitting application for adopting a child
requiring special care.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “child
requiring special care” means a child who requires special care
because of his/her physical or mental condition or because of
his/her unnatural or extra ordinary development or elder age
amongst the helpless child or voluntarily abandoned child.
The Board shall decide whether or not a child is the
child requiring special care,
Notwithstanding any thing contained elsewhere in
sub-section (1), in case any matter relating to the age, sex and
health of the child does not match with the type of the child
demanded by the family in the first priority while selecting the
family and the child requiring special care, the child requiring
special care who matches the type of the child demanded by
such family may be selected.
Other procedures relating to selection of family for
the child requiring special care and classification of such
children shall be as specified by Government of Nepal.
202. Special provision concerning permission of adoption: (1)
Notwithstanding any thing contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in
case any renowned foreign citizen desires to adopt a child pursuant to

Section 189, he/she may submit an application to the Board along with
a recommendation of the Head of the State, Head of the Government
or Foreign Minister of the concerned country.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “renowned person”
means any of the following persons:-
a) The Head of the State, Head of the Government or Foreign
Minister of a foreign country;
b) A Nobel laureate;
c) Celebrity of international fame;
d) Any person or professional having an annual income of
more than three hundred thousand.
While inquiring into the application received pursuant to
sub-section (1), if the Board deems if fit to allow such a foreign
citizen to adopt a child as per his/her demand, it shall make
recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers accordingly.
In case a recommendation is made pursuant to sub-section
(2), the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers may allow
such a foreign citizen to adopt a child as per his/her demand.
203. Details to be forwarded: A foreigner who adopts a Nepali
child pursuant to this Chapter shall have to forward once a year
through the Nepalese embassy or consular general located in
his/her country or mission abroad and Government of Nepal the
details relating to the arrangements he/she has made for
maintenance, education and health of such a child until such a
child attains the age of majority according to the law of the
concerned country.
204. To monitor: (1) The Board itself may conduct monitoring
about whether a foreigner who has adopted a Nepali child has
made arrangements for the maintenance, medical care, education
and care of such a child or not or may, for that purpose, form
according to necessity, a sub-committee comprising also of the
representative of Nepalese embassy or consular general based in
that country, until such a child attains majority age.
The Board or the sub-committee formed pursuant to
sub-Section (1) may, for that purpose, monitor by visiting the
place where the child is residing.
The Board or sub-committee under sub-section (1)
shall submit a report of the monitoring conducted by it to
Government of Nepal.
The report under sub-Section (3) shall, inter alia,
contain the statement whether the best interest of the adopted
Nepalese child is secured when he/she is residing with the
adoptive parent or not.
If the report received pursuant to sub-Section (3)
contains a statement that the adopted Nepalese child's best
interest is not secured when he/she is residing with the adoptive
parent, Government of Nepal may, where such a child is able to
express his/her opinion or is above ten years age, by taking
his/her opinion as well, draw attention of the Government of the
concerned country through diplomatic channel.
Where the situation of the adopted Nepalese child is
not improved even after attention was drawn pursuant to sub Section (5), Government of Nepal may, by a notification
published in the Nepal Gazette, remove such a country from the
list of the countries opened for inter-country adoption from
Nepal.
205. Suit may be instituted: A suit may, subject to the law of the
concerned country, be filed on the grounds of failure to make
arrangements for proper maintenance, medical care, education
and care of the adopted child within one year from the date of
attaining majority age in the case of a minor and by the
Nepalese embassy or consular general based in the concerned
country from the date of commission of such an act, for
annulment of adoption.
206 Provision of the Code not to be applicable: (1) Provision of

Section 189 of this Chapter shall not be applicable for adoption
of the child of a foreigner residing in Nepal.
(2) Provisions on adoption provided for in Sections 171,
172, 173, 176, 177, 178, 179, and 181 shall be applicable also to
the adoption effected by a foreigner pursuant to this Chapter.
207. Limitation: In the case where a separate statutory limitation in
regard to filing a complaint is provided for in this Chapter, it
shall be accordingly and in other cases, a person aggrieved by an
act carried out under this Chapter may file a complaint within a
period of one year from the date of carrying out of such act.

Chapter -10
Provision concerning partition of common property
208. To be deemed coparcener: For the purpose of apportionment
of common property of undivided family, the husband, wife,
father, mother, son or daughter shall be deemed to be a
coparcener.
209. Equal right in common property: (1) Each coparcener shall
have equal right in common property.
If a woman is pregnant at the time of apportionment
of common property and the child she has conceived is to
become a coparcener, the common property shall be apportioned
considering such a child to be so born a coparcener and setting
aside his/her share of property.
If the pregnant woman under sub-Section (2) does
not deliver a live child, the common property set aside for such
a child shall be apportioned equally to other coparceners.
210. A child born from spouses whose matrimonial relationship is
dissolved to obtain property: A child born to the spouses who
cannot solemnize marriage or whose marriage is not considered
valid or whose matrimonial relationship is dissolved according
to law shall obtain partition of the property from such a parent.
211. To obtain property from a mother: (1) A child whose father
is not traced out shall obtain his/her share of property from the
property of mother only
A wife kept without making public or a child born
from her shall not be entitled to claim a share of property after
death of the husband or father.
212. To obtain partition of property from share of a father or
husband: (1) The child or wife of brothers living in an
undivided family shall obtain partition of property only from the
part of the share of the property of their father or husband as the
case may be.
If the husband or father dies before effecting
partition of the common property, his wife or child, as the case
may be, shall have right over such property he has to obtain.
Where a person is the husband of more than one
wife they shall obtain partition of the common property only
from the part of the property of the husband.
213. Latter wife or offspring to obtain partition of the common
property from part of partition of property of husband or
father: (1) If a person concludes another marriage or a child is
born from the wife so married, after separation by effecting
apportionment of common property among previous wife, child
or at the time when he is living with such previous wife, child so
separated, by mixing his partitioned property with their property,
the wife so married latter or offspring born to such a wife shall
obtain partition of the property only from the part of the
property of such a husband or father.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, if a person whose wife is surviving concludes
another marriage before effecting partition of the common
property, the part of property of other coparcener shall be set
aside and the woman who is so married shall be given partition
of the property from the part of the property he is to obtain.
214. Partition of the common property to be given if maintenance
is deprived: (1) A husband, wife, father, mother, son or
daughter having common property of undivided family shall
have to make, according to his/her reputation and income,
arrangements for maintenance and medical treatment for the
wife, husband, son, daughter, father or mother, as the case may
The parent shall have to make according to their
financial condition, arrangements for proper education of a child.
If a person does not fulfill the obligations under subsections (1) or (2), the concerned coparcener may be entitled to
separate by obtaining partition of the common property.
215. Separation may be effected at anytime: (1) If there exists
mutual agreement among coparceners, they may effect
separation at any time by obtaining share of the common
property.
If the husband, father or head of the family
considers it appropriate for the coparceners to effect separation
by apportionment of common property rather than living in a
single family, the coparceners may effect separation by
apportionment of the common property.
Explanation:
For the purpose of this Code, “head of the family” means a
person having attained the age of majority who carries out works
being the main person of the family or who has the
responsibility to run the household affairs living in the same
joint family engaging in farming, trade, business or any other
work in various places.
216. Husband, wife may effect separation by obtaining share in
common property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section 214, the husband or wife, may effect separation at any
time by obtaining share-in-common property in any of the
following circumstances:-
If the husband or wife expels the wife or husband
from home, or
If the husband or wife causes physical or mental
torture to the wife or husband.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
if the husband concludes another marriage, the wife may effect
separation at any time by taking her share in common property.
(3) If the wife who has effected separation pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (2) concludes another marriage, the property
obtained by her for share in common property shall be retained
by the child, if any, born to her from previous husband; if not,
by the previous husband or his nearest successor.
217. Widow may effect separation by taking share in common
property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, a widow may effect separation at anytime by
taking her share in common property.
If a widow concludes another marriage, the property
obtained by her shall be retained by the child, if any, born to her
from previous husband, if not, by herself.
218. Renouncement of share in common property: (1) Any
coparcener may execute a deed renouncing his/her share in
common property with or without taking share in part in
common property or taking some cash or kind only for share in
common property.
While executing a deed of renouncement of share in
common property pursuant to sub-Section (1), the renouncement
of share in the property shall be deemed to have been executed
only if consent of the husband, wife or the son or daughter
attaining the age of majority of such coparcener, if any, agrees
to it.
If a deed of renouncement is executed under sunsection (2), it shall be deemed to be equal to obtaining the
partition of common property.
219. Apportionment of share in common property to be effected:
(1) In apportioning shares in common property of an undivided
family, a deed of apportionment of common property shall be
executed among the coparceners, subject to the provisions of
this Chapter.
In effecting apportionment of share in common
property pursuant sub-Section (1), apportionment shall be done
in such a manner that it corresponds to the property and debt of
the undivided family.
Explanation: For the purpose of his Chapter, "debt of
undivided family" means the debt owed as a result of transaction
carried out by a person acting as the head of family or by
transaction carried out with consent of all the coparceners or
by a person who, having attained majority and living in
undivided family carries out household affairs, farming, trade or
any other work in different places or by the transaction carried
out by other persons having obtained age of majority but
approved in writing by the head of the family.
In effecting apportionment of share in common
property, apportionment shall be made by balancing both high
value and less value property with the consent of all coparceners
and, if failing such consent, by a lottery.
If there arises a dispute in any property while
effecting apportionment, apportionment shall be effected only
after settlement of such dispute.
Provided that if it takes a long time to settle such a dispute,
the disputed property shall kept as undivided common property
and other properties shall be apportioned.
While apportioning the shares in common property,
it shall be executed in written form.
220. Matters to be specified in deed of apportionment of
property: The following matters shall be specified in the deed
of apportionment of property:-
Name, surname, age, address of the coparceners and
name of father and grand-father,
Provided that if partition of property of the
married husband or wife is to be made, their names
also shall be specified.
Movable and immovable property to be apportioned
among the coparceners,
If a coparcener owes debt or owns property,
amount of such debt and property.
If, upon apportion of share of property, a coparcener
is to live with another coparcener, the matters
relating thereto;
A declaration made by coparceners that they have
not concealed the property to be apportioned;
If a property is to devolve upon a coparcener only
upon death of the father, mother or husband, wife,
details thereof;
If the share of property or a coparcener is to be
entrusted to a person, matter relating thereto;
Other necessary matters.
221. Deed of apportionment of share of property to be registered:
(1) In effecting apportionment of share of property, a deed of
apportionment of share of property shall be required to be
executed in presence of witnesses and which shall be signed and
thumb-impressed by such witnesses and the coparceners and be
duly registered in the concerned office.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where a separation is effected by apportionment of share of
property in home balancing highly valuable and less valuable
property with or without executing deed of apportionment of
share of property among coparceners before January 10, 1978
and the share of property so received has already been
transmitted in the register of the concerned office or immovable
property of one's own part according to the apportionment is
separately enjoyed or sold or transacted, a deed of division of
share of property shall, even though the deed of apportionment
of share of property is not registered, be deemed to have been
effected.
222. Prohibition
providing
property
without
effecting
apportionment of share of property: (1) A person acting as
head of family having coparcener who has not received share of
property shall have no right to provide property of undivided
family
coparcener
without
effecting
apportionment of share of property.
Provided that:
He/she may provide any property to any coparcener
with the consent of all coparceners,
He/she may provide the property to the extent of
share of property of his/her part, even without the
consent of other coparceners.
In effecting apportionment of share of property pursuant to
this Chapter, the property provided to a coparcener pursuant to
clause (1) of proviso to sub-Section (1) shall be set off for the
share of property he/she is to obtain and other property shall be
apportioned.
223. Statement of claims to be filed by stating inventory of
property: (1) If a coparcener is desirous of effecting separation
by causing his part of share of property to be set aside, he/she
shall have to file a statement of claims specifying therein the
date of separation of bread and board from other coparceners
and disclosing the inventory of the apportionable immovable
property and debt and assets lying in one's own name and, to the
best of his/her knowledge in other coparcener's name.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the
term "date of separation of bread and board" means the
following date:-
where there is a deed of separation of bread
and board, date of execution of such deed,
If, there is no such a deed, the date as agreed
by coparceners for separation of bread and
board,
agreement
reached
between
coparceners pursuant to clause (b), the day
immediately before the day on which the
statement of claim is filed.
If the person filing a statement of claims pursuant to
sub-Section (1) is unable to submit the inventory of property,
he/she shall also have to specify reasons therefor.
If a statement of claims is filed pursuant to sub Section (1), the concerned person shall also have to submit a
statement of defense together with a statement whether the
claimant is to be provided a share of property or not and if
he/she agrees to provide a share of property together with the
inventory of the movable and immovable property registered in
his/her name and the debt and assets.
224. Matters to be stated in inventory: (1) The following matters
shall be stated in the inventory to be submitted pursuant to this
Chapter:-
The place of location of land, plot No., area and
approximate value,
(b) In the case of a house, place of location of the house,
plot no, area, rooms, size, story of house, whether it
is permanently built or mud made and approximate
value thereof,
In the case of movable property, details and
approximate value thereof,
In the case of cash, details thereof, bank balance,
share, debenture, treasury bills, if any,
In the case of livestock, details and approximate
value thereof,
In the case of bullion and jewelries, details and
approximate value,
In the case of vehicle, details thereof and
approximate value,
Details and approximate value of the properties
other than those referred to clauses (a) through (g).
If the value of any property is not stated pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or a dispute has arisen about the value thereof,
the court shall determine the value thereof on the basis in the
case of immovable property, the price fixed by the Land
Revenue Office and in the case of movable property on the basis
of the prevalent market price for the time being.
225. Partition to be made by taking inventory: (1) If it appears
from the statement of claims or statement of defense filed
pursuant to Section 223 that partition requires to be effected,
and where the inventory of property is submitted along with the
statement of claims or statement of defense, the court shall
effect the partition having the coparceners executed a deed to
the effect that the property they have submitted is the only
property to be partitioned and that they have not concealed any
other property.
If the inventory of property is not submitted along
with the statement of claims or statement of defense, the court
shall, by specifying time, ask the coparcener to submit
inventory, and if the coparceners submit inventory within the
time so specified, cause partition to be effected by causing the
coparceners to execute a deed pursuant to sub-Section (1).
226. Partition to be effected on the basis of inventory received:
(1) If the person who is to submit inventory of property within
the time limit as specified in Section 225 fails to submit
inventory or has elapsed time without submitting a statement of
defense, the court shall have to effect partition on the basis of
the inventory submitted by other coparceners.
Where partition is effected pursuant to sub-Section
(1), no statement of claims may be entertained on the ground
that one is dissatisfied on partition.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), if a statement of claims is filed for partition of the property
which was not disclosed by the coparceners in the inventory but
discovered latter on, court shall have to effect partition of such
property.
227. Inventory may be taken by breaking padlock: Where due to
failure of a person to submit an inventory required to be
submitted by him/her, the inventory of property has to be taken
by breaking the padlock of the house custody of which is taken
by him/her, the court may, by opening the padlock in presence
also of the person holding the key of the house, if he/she is
present, if not, in presence of at least two persons including a
representative of the local body and also the person submitting
statement of claims, the coparcener, prepare an inventory of the
property found by maintaining a record thereof.
228. Partition to be effected when inventory is produced: (1) If
the person who has to submit an inventory fails to submit the
inventory or cause the lapse time without submitting statement
of defense and the person submitting statement of claims
requesting for the partition of property also fails to submit the
inventory of property, the court shall, by causing the person
submitting statement of claims to execute a deed of the same
statement, defer the suit subject to the condition that the
partition shall be effected, at the time, when inventory is
produced.
Where a suit is deferred pursuant to sub-Section (1),
if the person submitting statement of claims files a petition
along with inventory, the court shall have to effect partition in
property under the law on the basis of previous record file itself.
229. Not to conceal property: (1) No person shall conceal, suppress
the property that is liable to partition.
If, at the time of partition of property or at the time
when asked by the court the partitionable property lying a
coparcener’s name, is subsequently proved to have been
concealed, the person so concealing the property shall have no
right over such property.
(3) The property concealed under sub-section (2) shall be
partitioned to other coparceners.
230. Property to be reimbursed: If a coparcener is deprived of
using any property partitioned, due to the property being
defective, all coparceners shall have to proportionately
reimburse to him/her property equal to defective property.
231. Property partitioned not to be exchanged: Except by mutual
consent of coparceners, no coparcener shall be entitled to
exchange any property received by him/her as partitioned
property for reason that after partition it is disordered, damaged
or he/she does not prefer it.
232. Partition of pledged or mortgaged property: (1) If a
coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property
which is liable for partition, the court shall, if all coparceners
agree, effect partition of the property by causing the property to
be released on or the condition that it shall be released on charge
from the property of undivided family.
If all the coparceners do not agree pursuant to sub Section (1), and if the person acting as head of the family or
other persons having attained majority, by securing signature
and thumb-impression also of the person acting as head of the
family, is found to have pledged or mortgaged the property, the
court shall effect partition of that property by causing the
property to be released or on the condition that it shall be
released on charge from the property of undivided family.
Save in the conditions referred to in sub-Section (1)
or (2), if a coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a
property liable to partition in other conditions, the court shall
effect partition of property by causing the property to be
released or on the condition that it shall be released on the
charge from his/her part of the common property.
233. Property or income may be withheld until partition is
effected: If a claimant to a suit of the common property appears
to obtain partition and if he/she files a petition after the
inventory has been submitted to withhold the property or income
thereof to the extent liable to partition to him/her, the court may,
having duly followed the procedures under the law, withhold the
property or income liable to partition to him/her until the
partition is effected.
234. Partition to be so effected as to have the provision of way or
passage: While effecting partition of property if there is no
access to way or passage to a house or land partitioned to a
coparcener and if such a way or passage could be managed from
the land of other coparcener, the partition shall be effected in
such a manner that the concerned coparcener shall provide the
way or passage for access to such house or land.
235. Debtor not to be specified without creditor’s consent: (1)
While effecting partition, a partition shall not be so effected as
to give the responsibility of paying the debt of undivided family
to a sole coparcener, without consent of the creditor.
Even if the responsibility of paying the debt is given
solely to any coparcener, if the creditor does not agree, all
coparceners shall have to pay the debt of the undivided family
equally.
236. Compensation to be paid, if statement of claims is filed by a
person who is not entitled to partition: If a person who is not
entitled to receive a partition in property, files a statement of
claims for receiving partition, the court shall order the person
filing the statement of claims to pay an amount having regard to
the claimed amount where such claimed amount is specified in
the suit filed and where such amount is not specified a
reasonable amount to the defendant, as compensation.
237. Partition share, money or expenditure may be awarded: (1)
If a person who is entitled to obtain partition share, money or
expenditure from a person according to the judgment, files,
having failed to so receive a petition before the court, the court
shall, if the parties are the same, cause the partition money or
expenditure according to the judgment to be awarded as soon as
possible.
If the partition share, expenditure or money is not
provided pursuant to sub-Section (1), for that the person who is
to provide partition, money or expenditure shall be caused to
award a reasonable compensation as well to the petitioner.
238. Limitation: (1) The person aggrieved by an act carried out
under this Chapter may file statement of claims as follows:-
Anytime where partition has never been
effected or a common general deed has been
executed in effecting partition or even though
there is no deed where both the parties have
enjoyed the properties;
Within three months from the date of partition
of property if one is not satisfied with the
partition of property;
In case of concealing or suppression of
property, till the life of the concerned person;
In cases other than those referred to in clauses
(a), (b) and (c), within a period of six months
from the date of commission of such an act.
239. Saving: (1) The partition effected pursuant to the laws for the
time being in force, before commencement of this Code shall be
deemed to have been effected under this Code.
(2) Where a person has taken maintenance for living
(Jiuni) before commencement of this Code, he/she shall be
deemed to have taken partition.

Chapter 11
Provision concerning Testamentary Will
240. Property may be given by Testamentary Will: (1) In case a
person attaining the age of eighteen years and of sound mind
executes a deed unilaterally expressing his/her will of
transferring the property under his/her title, possession and
ownership to the title, possession and ownership of any other
person upon his/her death, he/she shall be deemed to have
executed a testamentary will.
(2) In case one has executed a testamentary will pursuant to
sub-Section (1), the property he/she has willed shall, upon
his/her death, be transferred to the title, possession and
ownership of the person so willed.
(3) While executing a testamentary will pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the person executing the will may give all or any portion of
his/her property or any specific property on any condition or
without any condition as stated in the testamentary will.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no joint testamentary will may be executed through a
single deed by two or more persons.
241. Procedures of Executing Testamentary Will: (1) Whoever
desires to execute a testamentary will pursuant to Section 240
shall prepare two sets of deed stating the details of the property
he/she has desired to will and of he person getting the property
according to the testamentary will and get it signed and sealed in
the presence of any authority certifying testamentary will
pursuant to Section 242.
2) In case the concerned person is present for executing
the deed pursuant to sub-Section (1) along with a deed of
testamentary will, the concerned official to certify the
testamentary will shall, if the deed is found to be duly prepared,
read out the contents of the deed and make the meaning and
consequence of the deed known and if he/she seems to be
desiring to execute the deed on his/her free will and consent,
cause him/her to sign on the deed and certify the deed stating
the same content on the deed.
3) In the deed referred to in sub-Section (1), at least two
persons of full legal capacity shall have to be the witnesses.
4) While executing the testamentary will pursuant to sub Section (1) or (2), the certified place and date of execution of
the testamentary will shall also have to be stated.
5) One copy of the deed certified pursuant to sub-Section
(2) shall have to be retained in the office record and another
copy of the deed shall be given to the person executing the
testamentary will.
(6) The deed not completing the procedures according to
this Section shall not be deemed to have been duly executed and
the title, possession and ownership of the person executing the
testamentary will shall not be transferred through such deed.
242. Authority to certify Testamentary Will: (1) A testamentary
will prepared under this Chapter shall be certified by any of the
following authorities:-
6) Land Revenue Officer at the Land Revenue Office;
7) Staff deputed as a team from the Land Revenue Office;
8) In the event of living outside Nepal, the concerned official
of the Nepali Embassy or Consulate General’s Office in
the foreign country;
9) Notary public.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no title of immovable property may be transferred
through the testamentary will certified by a notary public.
243. Provisions
concerning
sealed
Testamentary
Will:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 241, any one
may execute a testamentary will with the condition that the
name of the recipient of the testamentary will shall be disclosed
only upon his/her death.
2) While executing testamentary will pursuant to sub Section (1), the person executing the testamentary will shall
prepare two copies of the deed and produce them to a Land
Revenue Officer at the Land Revenue Office or to the concerned
official at the Nepali Embassy or Consulate General’s Office if
living in abroad.
3) In case the deed of testamentary will is submitted
pursuant to sub-Section (2), the concerned official shall fulfill
the procedures referred to in Section 242 and certify the deed
and each of the deeds shall be put into separate envelop and seal
them and mark on the outer surface of each of the envelops as
“Sealed Testamentary Will” and the person executing the will
and the official certifying it shall also sign and seal them.
Provided that there is no need of witnesses while
executing sealed testamentary will.
(4) One of the envelops sealed pursuant to sub-Section (3)
shall be retained safely in the office and another copy shall be
given to the person executing the deed.
(5) The person certifying the testamentary will pursuant to
sub-Section (4) shall not, until the sealed testamentary will is
opened upon death of the person executing the testamentary will,
inform anyone about or make public or cause to be disclosed the
person getting the property according to the testamentary will.
(6) In case the envelope retained testamentary will
pursuant to sub-Section (4) is opened or the name of person
getting the property according to the testamentary will is made
known to anyone or disclosed, or the sealed envelope is opened,
the concerned official shall be deemed to have committed abuse
of authority and he/she may be taken actions accordingly.
(7) No envelope of the testamentary will sealed according
to this Section shall be opened until the person executing the
will is surviving.
(8) Once the sealed envelope is received upon death of the
person executing the sealed testamentary will, the person in the
order of priority to entitle to the succession shall open the sealed
testamentary will in presence of at least one official or staff of
the local body and a record of opening of the seal shall have to
be maintained.
(9) In case a sealed testamentary will is opened pursuant
to sub-Section (8), the person to entitle the property according
to the sealed testamentary will shall submit an application to the
concerned Land Revenue Office in order to transfer the title of
the property according to the testamentary will along with a
copy of the testamentary will.
(10) In case the application is filed pursuant to sub Section (9), the concerned Land Revenue Office shall have to
match the copy of the testamentary will with the sealed
testamentary will retained in the office.
Provided that in case the testamentary will has been
executed in an Embassy or Consulate General’s Office, the
office to transfer the title of the property shall have to match the
copy of the testamentary will after getting the sealed
testamentary will from the concerned Embassy or Consulate
General’s Office.
(11) If the sealed testamentary will and the statement of
the applicant is found to be matched while matching the deeds
pursuant to sub-Section (10), the testamentary will shall be
executed and the title shall be transferred.
244. Special Provisions concerning Holographic Will: (1) In case
any person has given any property to any other person writing a
deed of will on his/her own stating the details of the property
he/she has desired to will and signing on it, notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, such a deed of
will shall be deemed to have been duly executed and once the
deed of will becomes effective, the title, possession and
ownership of the property referred to in such a deed of will shall
be transferred to the name of the person getting the property.
Provided that no title, possession and ownership of immovable
property may be transferred through such a deed of will.
(2) The deed of will referred to in sub-Section (1) may be
executed with or without a seal.
245. Procedures to be fulfilled if the person executing will is
blind: (1) In case the person executing the deed of will is a
blind, the official certifying the deed shall have to read out the
content of the deed once and the person to witness the deed shall
also have to read out the deed to the blind person and meaning
and consequences of the deed shall also have to be made known
to him/her, before causing such a person to sign on the deed.
(2) If the person executing the deed expresses that he/she
has executed the deed on his/her free will and consent while
reading out the deed to him/her pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
deed shall have to be certified stating the same.
246. Procedures to be fulfilled if the person executing will is
hearing impaired: (1) In case the person executing the deed of
will is hearing impaired and he/she could not understand the
meaning and consequences of the deed while it is read out by the
official certifying the deed, the deed shall be given to him/her to
read and the meaning and consequences of the deed shall be
made known to him/her by noting it down in a separate sheet of
paper.
(2) In case the meaning and consequences of the deed
shall not be made known to him/her pursuant to sub-Section (1)
or in case the person executing the deed is illiterate or unable to
read, the deed shall be certified by making known to him/her the
meaning and consequences of the deed by way of symbol and
also by making the meaning and consequences of the deed
known to his/her spouse or son or daughter living in the
undivided family, and in case he/she does not have such relative
or even such relative is also hearing impaired, to the two
persons chosen by the person executing the deed of will.
247. Person ineligible to become witness: In a will to be executed
under this Chapter, the following person shall not be eligible to
be a witness:-
a) One who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
b) One who has no sound mind;
c) The official to certify the deed for which a witness is
required;
d) If the deed has been certified by a notary public, his/her
spouse of the undivided family or a relative within
his/her three generations or his/her staff;
e) The person who is receiving property under the deed or
his/her successor.
248. Pre-Conditions to be fulfilled: (1) In case a pre-condition has
to be fulfilled by the person receiving the property in order to
acquire the property according to a will executed under this
Chapter, the deed of will shall not be effective unless he/she
fulfills such a pre-condition.
(2) In case the deed of will could not be effective pursuant
to sub-Section (1), the property under the will shall be according
to the law of succession upon the death of the person executing
such deed.
249. Deed of will to be cancelled: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a testamentary will shall,
ipso facto, be revoked in the following circumstances:-
In case the person to receive a property according to
a deed of will dies before the person executing the
deed of will.
In case the person receiving the property under the
will commits or causes to commit a homicide against
the person executing the will with the motive to
receive the property under such a will.
250. Deed of Will may be amended or revoked: (1) The person
executing a deed of will executed under this Chapter may at any
time revoke it or alter its terms or conditions.
(2) Where any person has executed a deed of will under
this Chapter, he/she may get such deed revoked executing a
separate deed being present before the official who has certified
the deed of will.
(3) While getting the deed of will revoked pursuant to sub Section (2), the procedures referred to in Section 241 shall have
to be followed.
(4) The property once willed shall not be given to another
person without a deed of will and without getting the earlier
deed of will revoked under this Chapter.
(5) If a property has been given to another person without
getting the earlier deed of will revoked pursuant to sub-Section
(4), the deed of will executed earlier shall be valid.
251. Person willed may deny: (1) Where any person has executed a
deed of will under this Chapter, the person getting the property
according to the deed may deny to accept the property at any
time.
(2) In case the person getting the property denies
accepting pursuant to sub-Section (1), the deed shall be ipso
facto be revoked.
(3) In case the person getting the property denies
accepting the property pursuant to sub-Section (1) after the
death of the person executing the deed of will, such property
shall be divested according to the law of succession prevailing
at the time of death of the person executing the deed of will.
252. Certain Property to be segregated: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, any person shall, while
executing a deed of will, have to segregate one fourth of his/her
property for the following people dependent on him/her:-
a) For livelihood of a spouse having no property or
source of income or employment;
b) For livelihood of incapacitated son or daughter
having no property or source of income or
employment;
c) For livelihood and education of the minor son or
daughter having not attained the age of twenty one
years until he/she attains the age of twenty one years.
253. Transfer of title: (1) In case anyone has executed a deed of will
under this Chapter, the title, possession and ownership of the
property so willed shall be transferred to the name of the person
so willed subject to provisions of this Chapter upon the death of
the person executing the will.
(2) In case the title, possession and ownership of the
property is transferred pursuant to sub-Section (1), if such
property has to be transferred, the office or officer to transfer
the property shall have to transfer the title, possession and
ownership of the property according to the deed of will.
(3) While transferring the property pursuant to sub-Section
(2), the person getting the property shall have to pay the fee
equal to the fee that is applicable in the case of deed of will with
immediate effect.
254. Provisions concerning Partition of Property and Common
Property to be ineffective: (1) After the commencement of this
Chapter, the provisions relating to partition of property and
common property shall ipso facto be ineffective.
(2) After this Chapter commences, the provisions relating
to partition of property or a lump sum amount in lieu thereof or
an annual amount or partial amount or alimony while divorcing
the relationship between husband and wife through the consent
of husband and wife or because of the husband shall be ipso
facto inactivated.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
in the cases where the relationship between husband and wife is
divorced through the consent of husband and wife or because of
the husband, if the wife so demands, the court shall have to
cause the husband to pay the wife appropriate amount having
regard to the following matters:-
(a) The income and property of the husband;
(b) Number of the children
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (3),
in case the income and property of the wife demanding for a
share of property or an amount in lieu thereof or expenses is
more than the property and income of the husband, no amount
shall be required to be paid by the husband to the wife.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in cases where a case for divorce of the relationship of
husband
already
filed
before
commencement of this Chapter, partition of property between
the husband and wife may be effected or an amount or expense
may cause to be paid according to the then prevailing law.
255. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter 11
Provision concerning Succession
256. Succession deemed to be opened: Upon death of a person,
his/her succession shall be deemed to be opened.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter "succession"
means an act to transfer liabilities and rights of the deceased in
regard to debt, wealth or property to a successor in accordance
with law.
257. Succession to devolve upon a successor: Where a person's
succession is opened, such a succession shall devolve upon
his/her nearest successor.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "a
successor" means a person who stands in the priority order of
succession under Section 3.
258. Priority order of the successors upon whom succession shall
devolve: (1) The priority order of the nearest successor upon
whom succession shall devolve shall, subject to other Section of
this Chapter, be as follows:-
Husband or wife of undivided family;
Son, daughter, widow daughter-in-law;
Father,
mother,
mother,
grandson
granddaughter towards the son of undivided family;
Separated husband, wife, father, mother, stepmother;
Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from the son’s
generation;
Separated grand-father, grand-mother;
Uncle, aunty, nephew, niece of undivided family
Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from son's
generation,
Wife of elder brother, wife of younger brother, of
undivided family,
Separated elder or younger brothers and sisters;
Other nearest successor within seven generation of
male clan.
So long as the person in the upper order of priority
referred to sub-Section (1) is surviving, the person in the
subsequent order of priority shall not be entitled to succession.
(3) Where more than one person are standing in one and
same priority order under sub-Section (1), all persons shall be
entitled to equal succession.
If any successor of the priority order upon whom
succession devolves pursuant to sub-Section (3) denies to accept
succession, the succession shall devolve upon the successors of
the same order and if such a successor too denies to accept it,
succession shall be devolved to the successor of next in order.
259. Succession
devolve
distant
successor:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 258, if the
succession of a person who was living, by taking his/her share
of family property, with a distant relative in spite of having
close relatives, is opened upon his/her death, the succession of
such a person shall devolve upon the successor with whom the
deceased was residing.
Where the deceased was maintained by a distant
successor, instead of close one, such deceased's succession shall
devolve upon the person so maintaining.
260. Succession to devolve to a caretaker: In case a closer
successor has not cared and a distant successor has taken care of
a person at the life time of such person, the succession of the
person so taken care shall devolve upon the distant successor so
caring.
261. Succession to devolve upon separated successor: (1) If the
succession of a person who was residing, by taking share of
family property, with a successor who is separated, failing
maintenance by his/her successor of undivided family, is opened
upon his/her death, the deceased's succession shall devolve upon
such a separated successor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where the succession of a person who was residing, without
having obtained share of property, with any successor only for
some days, is opened upon his/her death, the deceased's
succession shall devolve upon the successor with the whom
deceased was so living later.
262. Succession
devolve
person
maintaining:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
where the deceased was maintained by a person other than the
successor, such succession shall devolve upon the person who
had maintained the deceased.
263. Not to be obliged to accept succession: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no person shall be
obliged to accept a succession.
A person who declines to accept a succession shall
have to provide information in writing to the court thereof
within three years of devolution of succession.
If a person does not accept succession within the
period under sub-Section (2), such succession shall be deemed
to be devolved upon another successor.
Even if a person does not accept a succession
pursuant to sub-Section (1), he/she shall have to conduct
obsequies rites of the deceased in accordance with tradition.
264. No right to succession: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person commits or causes to be
committed homicide against person by anger, avenge or with
malafide intention of receiving succession, the offspring of the
person so committing or causing to be committed shall not be
entitled to receive succession of the deceased.
265. Obligations and rights of a person upon whom succession is
devolved: (1) The obligations and rights of the person upon
whom succession is devolved shall be as follows:-
to perform or cause to be performed obsequies rites
or funeral procession of the deceased according to
his/her tradition,
to pay deceased's debt due to the creditor, and
to have right over the deceased's borrower and
property.
Where the obsequies rites or funeral procession of a
deceased was performed by a person other than the person who
is entitled to the succession of the deceased, the person entitled
to such succession shall have to provide the cost incurred for
performing obsequies rites or funeral procession of the deceased
and additional twenty five percent amount of such cost to the
person who has performed such obsequies rites or funeral
procession.
Provided that if any person has caused to perform the
obsequies rites or funeral procession of the deceased by others,
he/she shall be liable to pay merely the exact expense incurred
in such obsequies rites or funeral acts.
266. Creditor may recover debt: Where a person whose succession
is opened has creditors, such creditors may recover his/her debt
from the person upon whom succession has devolved.
Provided that a successor shall not be obliged to pay the
debt in excess of the deceased's property succeeded by him/her.
267. Local body to receive succession property: (1) Where the
succession of a person is opened and his or successor declines to
accept such succession, the deceased's property remaining after
deducting the cost incurred for his/her funereal act rites and
obsequies acts and after payment of debt due to his/her creditors
shall be devolved to the local body.
Where a person dies in a place and has no successor
but has but property in that place, the person who performs
his/her funereal act rite or maintains his/her books and accounts
shall have to promptly give notice thereof to the local body.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-Section (2),
the local body shall prepare an inventory of the property and
goods of the deceased in the presence of two local gentlemen
and forward notice thereof including a public inquiry deed
thereof to the concerned District Administration Office.
If a public inquiry deed together with the inventory
of wealth and goods is received pursuant to sub-Section (3) and
address of the deceased is traced out, the District Administration
Office shall transmit a notice according to law to the successors
of the deceased to receive deceased's property within a period of
three months.
If the successor of the deceased does not appear
within the period specified pursuant to sub-Section (4) or the
successor of such a deceased is not traced out, the District
Administration Office shall publish a notice on a newspaper of
national level inviting his/her successor, if any, to make a claim
over the deceased's property.
If the successor of the deceased appears within the
period of time under sub-Section (5) or (6), the property
remained after deducting cost incurred for funereal act of the
deceased, which shall be given to the concerned person, and
after recovering ten percent of such property, to the concerned
successor.
If no successor of the deceased appears within the
time period specified in sub-Section (5) or his/her address is not
traced out, the property remained after giving the cost incurred
for funereal act to the concerned person, shall be received by the
local body.
The property received by the local body pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (7) shall be required to be deposited by the
concerned successor or the District Administration Office to the
fund of the local body.
The property received by a local body pursuant to
this Section shall have to use by such body for public interest.
268. Property of a foreigner died in Nepal: (1) In case a foreigner
dies in Nepal and he/she has no successor at that place and there
is his/her property, the person performing his/her funeral rites
and or maintaining his/her accounts shall immediately inform
about the matter to the local body.
(b) In case the information referred to in sub-Section (1) is
received, the local body shall prepare a statement of the property
of the deceased in presence of at least two local gentlepersons
and furnish one copy of the statement to the concerned District
Administration Office along with a public deed of inquiry
executed to that effect.
(3) In case a deed of public inquiry along with the statement of
property is received pursuant to sub-Section (2), the District
Administration shall immediately inform about it to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the Ministry shall have to send notice to
the concerned country of the deceased according to law to
receive the property of the deceased within three months.
(4) In case any successor of the deceased is present within the
time limit referred to in sub-Section (3), the expenses incurred
for funeral rites of the deceased shall be deducted and given to
the concerned person and a fee of 10% shall be charged on the
property and the remaining property shall be handed over to the
successor of the deceased.
(5) In case no successor of the deceased is present within the
time limit referred to in sub-Section (3), the expenses incurred
for funeral rites of the deceased shall be deducted and given to
the concerned person and the remaining property shall devolve
on the local body.
(6) The property acquired by the local body pursuant to sub Section (5) shall be recorded in a fund of the local body.
(6) The local body shall use the property acquired by it pursuant
to sub-Section (5) for public interest.
269. Limitation: In case where separate statutory limitation to file a
complaint is provided for in this Chapter, it shall be accordingly
and in other cases, a person aggrieved by an act carried out
under this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of two
years from the date on which the succession is opened.

Part 4
LAW CONCERNING
PROPERTY

Chapter-1
General Provisions Concerning Property
270. Deemed to be property: Any cash, goods or action shall be deemed
to be a property if such cash, goods or action can be used or transacted
in or the title thereto can be transferred by way of purchase, sale or
otherwise or any benefit can be derived therefrom.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Code, "goods" means
any movable or immovable property.
271. Property deemed to be in either movable or immovable form: A
property shall be deemed to be in either movable or immovable form
irrespective of its material or non-material, tangible or intangible form.
272. Property deemed to be immovable: (1) The following property shall
be deemed to be an immovable property:
Building or land or structure fixed thereto,
Any goods attached to a building or land permanently,
Mines, stones or minerals embedded in land,
Natural water, surface water and underground water,
Building or other structure made permanently in such a manner that it
can float over a river, lake or pond,
A standing tree, plant or fruit tree or fruits or flowers growing on
such a tree, plant or fruit tree, crops in land, or
Any movable property attached to an immovable property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
any structure, goods or any part thereof, fixed or attached to any
immovable property gets or is detached or unfixed, the structure,
goods or part so detached or unfixed shall be deemed to be a movable
property.
273. Property deemed to be movable: The following property shall be
deemed to be a movable property:
Goods that can be moved from one place to another,
Bond, security, promissory note, bill of exchange, letter of
credit or other negotiable instrument or benefits thereform,
Intellectual property,
Right in security,
Trade good-will or franchise,
Property other than the immovable property.
274. Classification of property according to ownership: The property
shall be classified as follows according to the ownership and the form
of use thereof:
Private property,
Property in common,
Joint property,
Community property,
Public property,
Government property,
Trust property.
275. Property deemed to be private property: (1) Any of the following
properties owned by any person or properties accrued therefrom shall
be deemed to be the private property of that person:
Property earned by way of his/her knowledge, skills or
effort,
Property acquired by way of donation, bequeath, will or
inheritance,
Property acquired by way of a lottery or gift,
Property acquired by way of remuneration, gratuity,
pension, treatment allowance, provident fund, insurance
or other social security,
Property acquired by way of intellectual property or
royalty,
Property acquired in any manner whatsoever while living
apart upon separation of board and bread in accordance
with law or while managing own accommodation at own
cost despite not so living apart,
Property earned or acquired by a woman prior to
marriage or acquired from her parental side at the time of
marriage or accrued therefrom, or
Property which, according to law, is considered to be the
exclusive private property of a person.
Any person shall be entitled to exclusively deal with
his/her private property, subject to this Code.
276. Property deemed to be property in common: (1) Any of the
following properties being owned by any co-owner, out of the coowners, subject to Section 275 or property accrued therefrom shall be
deemed to be the property in common:
Property inherited from ancestors,
Property owned by the co-owners,
Property earned by the co-owners from the farming,
industry, trade or business in common or property
accrued therefrom.
Except where separated in accordance with law, any
property earned by the spouses or property accrued therefrom shall
also be deemed to be the property in common of the spouses.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of subsection (1), any property earned by parents for the purpose of partition
between the parents and their children shall also be considered to be
the property in common.
The use of, and transfer of right in, and other provisions
on, the property in common shall be as set forth in the other Chapters
of this Code.
277. Property deemed to be joint property: (1) Any property owned by
two or more persons except members in of the undivided family or
property accrued therefrom shall be deemed to be a joint property.
The entitlement to and share of a joint holder in the joint
property shall be as set forth in a deed setting out such entitlement and
share, and failing such a deed, the joint holders of that property shall
be deemed to have equal entitlement and share.
The use and management of, transfer of title to, and other
provisions of, the joint property shall be governed by this Chapter and
the other Chapters of this Code.
278. Prohibition on alteration in joint property without consent: Any
alteration in a joint property or any change in its form may not be
made without consent of all the owners of the joint property.
279. Trees, plants on boundary to be deemed common: Unless
otherwise proved, trees or plants lying on the boundary of two owners
of adjoining lands shall be deemed to be their common property.
280. Management, protection and maintenance of joint property: (1)
The management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
shall be made as per the consent of the owners of that property.
Failing consent between the owners in relation to the
management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (1), the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property shall be made according to the
decision of majority members.
Failing a majority opinion between the owners in relation
to the management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (2), the owner who has the largest entitlement
or share in that property shall make its management, protection and
maintenance.
Expenses incurred in the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property, if any, made by any owner pursuant
to sub-section (2) or (3) shall be borne by all owners in proportion to
their respective entitlement or share.
The owner failing to manage, protect and maintain the
joint property in accordance with sub-section (4) shall pay the expense
incurred in the management, protection and maintenance of that
property to the person making management, protection and
maintenance thereof no later than one year.
Where any owner fails to pay the expenses incurred in
the management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
within the period referred to in sub-section (5), the person making
management, protection and maintenance thereof shall be entitled to
purchase the entitlement and share of that owner in that property at the
prevailing price.
Provided that the person so purchasing the joint property may
deduct the expenses of management and maintenance of his/her
portion.
281. Legal action or defense by owner of joint property: (1) In the event
of a need to institute a legal action against any person or defend a case
in relation to the protection of the joint property, all owners have to
make such institution or defense.
Where all owners are not available as referred to in subsection (1), any or some of the owners may, on behalf of him/her or
the other owners, institute a legal action against any person or defend
a case.
282. Separation of share from joint property: (1) Any owner of the joint
property may separate his/her entitlement or share therein from the
other owners at any time.
The separation of the joint property as referred to in subsection (1) has to be effected in accordance with the consent of all
owners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), where the separation of any joint property results either in a
significant loss to the other owners or in the form of that property,
such separation thereof may not be made.
Where any joint property cannot be separated in the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (3), the owners of that
property shall sell such property and divide the proceeds of sale
between them in proportion to their respective entitlement and share
therein.
Where any joint property cannot be sold in accordance
with sub-section (4) or all owners do not agree to sell it and any owner
intends to buy such property, such owner may exclusively own it by
paying the price of that property to the other owners in the same
proportion.
Where two or more owners intend to buy the joint
property pursuant to sub-section (5), the owner who agrees to pay the
highest price shall be entitled to purchase such property.
283. Provisions Concerning community, public, government and trust
properties: The provisions of community, public, government and
trust properties, the ownership, use, management thereof, and transfer
of right therein, and other provisions shall be as set forth in the other
Chapters of this Code.
284. Limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or action taken
under this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months
from the date on which such an act or action is done or taken.

Chapter-2
Provisions Concerning Ownership and Possession
285. Ownership to be deemed: Where any person acquires the right in
any property in accordance with law, his/her ownership in that
property shall be deemed.
286. Right of an owner: Subject to laws, a person, in capacity of the
owner of any property, shall have the following right in that property:
To use the property,
To sell or otherwise transfer the title to the property,
To mortgage or pledge the property in any manner,
To deal in the property,
To take the profits of the property in any manner whatsoever,
To make any kind of physical construction, wall or fence or
delimit boundary, in his/her land, or change the form of any
property or otherwise protect it,
To use his/her land or part below its surface or goods therein or
sky above its surface, or
To institute legal action in any manner in relation to the
acquisition or security of the property.
287. Possessory right to be deemed: Where a person holds any property
with him/her with intention to possess the property in accordance with
law, he/she shall be deemed to have possessory right over the property.
288. Acquisition of possessory right: (1) A person may acquire the
possessory right over any property in the following circumstance:
In the capacity of the owner thereof,
Acquiring the property owned by another person in
accordance with law,
Obtaining consent of the possessor of such property.
Only the possessory right acquired peaceably, openly or
in bona fide shall be deemed to have been acquired lawfully.
289. Person competent to acquire possessory right: (1) A person may
acquire the possessory right either in person or through his/her agent.
A person who is incompetent and semi-competent may
acquire the possessory right through his/her guardian.
290. Rights of possessor: (1) Any person, in capacity of the possessor,
shall be entitled to the following rights, subject to the laws:
To uninterruptedly possess the property in his/her
possession, subject to the laws in force, or the contract, if
any, entered into in relation to that property,
To use any benefits of the property in his/her possession.
In the event of acquisition by a person of the possessory
right in bona fide over any goods owned by any one else, the person
shall be entitled to reimbursement from the other person who has the
possessory right over the property for necessary expenses incurred in
the management, maintenance or care of such goods.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the former possessor shall be entitled to retain such property with
him/her unless and until the expenses referred to in that sub-section
are reimbursed.
Where a bona fide possessor of any property not in
his/her ownership has attached any goods to such a property, the
possessor shall be entitled to detach or take out the goods attached by
him/her from the property without tempering with such a property.
291. Circumstances where possessory right is lost: The possessory right
of a person over any property shall be deemed as lost in any of the
following circumstances:
If the person abandons the property,
If the person transfer the property, or
If the property is totally destroyed or become useless.
292. Adverse possessory right to be deemed: (1) Notwithstanding any
thing contained elsewhere in this Chapter, where any person has
possessed any property or land owned by any one else since more than
three years ago in the case of movable property and thirty years ago in
the case of land as if the property or land were owned by him/her, that
person shall be deemed to have adverse possessory right over such a
property or land.
Provided that:
No adverse possessory right may be acquired over a
government, public, community or trust land despite the
length of the period of possession.
Where a contract or other law provides for separate
provisions in relation to any property or land, such
provisions shall be applicable to such a property or land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where possession is acquired forcefully or by doing any action
secretly or without knowledge of the possessor of any property or land,
this Section shall not be applicable.
293. Compensation for damage: (1) Where any person has acquired the
possessory right over any property forcefully, with malafide intention
or secretly, the person shall return the benefits derived from that
possessory right and such property to the concerned person and pay
compensation for the benefits which he/she has already used or for
any loss caused to the property due to his/her negligence in the course
of using the property.
Where any property owned by any one else is lost or
damaged during the continuance of the possessory right of a person
over the property, the person shall pay compensation for such a
property to the concerned person.
Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done or action
taken pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of
three months from the date of knowledge of such an act or action.

Chapter-3
Provisions Concerning Uses of Property
295. Prohibition on use or acquisition of other's property: (1) No
person may use other's property without consent of that other person.
No person may acquire other's property without consent
of that other person.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with law, acquire any property owned by a person for public interest.
No person may temper with other's property by closing
the road or exit of the other person or doing any work or construction
on the border of his/her land or otherwise.
No person may enter other's house and compound
without consent of that other person except in accordance with law.
296. Property to be inviolable: (1) No person may encroach or trespass
other's property by way of overlapping, pressing or otherwise.
Where any person takes possession of other's property by
way of any act referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be
deemed to have encroached or trespassed such a property.
297. Security measures to be adopted: A person shall, while doing any
work on his/her house or land, adopt security measures in order to
avoid any loss or damage or effect to the neighbor's house or land in
any manner.
Provided that matters such as gas, smell, smoke or noise
emitted or produced from the use by any neighbor of his/her house or
land, except where a business transaction is carried on by the neighbor,
shall not be deemed to cause a loss or damage or effect to a house or
land.
298. Prohibition on building house in other's land without consent: (1)
No person shall build a house in a land without obtaining a written
consent of the owner of the land.
If any person builds a house in the land without obtaining
a written consent of the owner of the land, the landowner may, if
he/she so desires, purchase of the house on payment of the price that
is less by twenty five percent of the market value of that house.
If the landowner does not purchase such a house pursuant
to sub-section (2), the house owner may, if the owner so consents,
purchase the land on payment of the price that is higher by twenty five
percent of the land where the house is located.
If both parties do not agree to purchase and sell the house
or land pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the person who has built the
house shall demolish the house and take away his/her materials within
six months of the date on which the house is so built.
If the house is not demolished within the period referred
to in sub-section (4), it shall belong to the landowner.
299. To maintain distance while putting windows: If a person or
government body has to build a house by putting a window towards
the neighbor's land, the person or body shall have to maintain a
distance by leaving at least five feet land.
300. Prohibition on channeling water of house or roof: No person shall
channel the water of his/her house or roof to other's house or land or a
public road.
301. Prohibition on making safety tank adjoining to neighbor's land:
(1) No person shall make a safety tank by adjoining it to the
neighbor's land.
If a person has to make a safety tank in his/her land,
he/she shall have to leave at least three feet land towards the
neighbor's land except with the neighbor's consent.
302. To leave land while digging a well: In digging a well in one's land,
one shall have to leave the land so that the distance of at least three
feet can be maintained.
303. Prohibition on planting trees or plants causing effect: (1) No
person shall plant trees or plants in such a way so that it causes
effects to other's house, land or property.
If the trees or plants planted by a person in his/her land
cause any effect to other's house, land or property, the person who has
planted such trees or plants shall cut the branches or roots of the trees
or plants in such a manner as not to cause loss or damage to that other
person's house, land or property.
If a person who has planted such trees or plants fails to
cut the branches or roots of the trees or plants pursuant to sub-section
(2), the person who is affected therefrom may cut the branches or
roots of such trees or plants on his/her own.
The person who has planted trees or plants shall bear the
amount for the loss or damage, if any, caused to other's land, house or
property while cutting the branches or roots of trees or plants pursuant
to sub-section (2) or (3), the expenses incurred by the affected person
in cutting the branches or roots of trees or plants or amount for the
property damaged therefrom on the failure of the person who has
planted such trees or plants to cut the branches or roots thereof.
304. Right to compensation: If any loss or damage is caused to any
person from any act done or action taken by any person in accordance
with this Chapter, the loss or damage sustaining person shall be
entitled to recover a reasonable compensation from the doer such act.
305. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done or action
taken in accordance with this Chapter may file a complaint within a
period of six months from the date of knowledge of such act or action.

Chapter-4
Provisions Concerning Cultivation, Use and Registration of Land
306. Prohibition on use of other's land: No person shall cultivate or use,
or cause to be cultivated or used, any land in which another person has
the title, possession and ownership without consent of that other
person.
307. Requirement to allow land to be used for ditch: (1) If a person who
needs to make a ditch through other's land to cultivate his/her land
makes a request for land, the owner of concerned land shall have to
provide the land to make the ditch through the place where the owner
considers appropriate.
In consideration for the land provided for making a ditch
through it pursuant to sub-section (1), the person making the ditch
shall provide a substitute land, amount according to the prevailing
price of the land used in the making of ditch or reasonable
compensation to the owner of land concerned.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
a ditch is made in a public or government land, it is not required to
provide a substitute land, price of land or compensation for the land
used in the making of ditch.
308. Prohibition on using whole water of river or stream: No owner of
a land shall so use the whole water of the river or stream which
originates or flows from the land as to prevent the owner of
downstream land from using the same or as to endanger the life of
aquatic animals in the river or stream or as to adversely affect the
ecological balance.
309. Prohibition on making ditch affecting irrigated field: No person
shall make a new ditch above a land irrigated by a ditch already made
and in operation in a manner to significantly lessen the volume of
water in that land.
310. Use and allocation of ditch water: (1) A person who spends labor or
money in the making of a ditch shall have the first priority to the ditch
water for the cultivation of land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
a place where people have been using the water according to agreed
division between them from the time immemorial, all people shall be
entitled to use the ditch water according to the division.
If the water is sufficient for or is no longer required for a
person who uses the water pursuant to sub-section (1), another person
shall be entitled to use the ditch water for cultivating the land
irrespective of the person whom the ditch belongs to.
The water flows over the land of a person to the land of
another, such water may be used even without the consent of the
concerned land-owner, and no claim shall lie for the same.
311. Prohibition on alteration in ditch without consent: If any ditch is
made only in the land of a person and other persons have also been
using the ditch, the owner of land where such a ditch is situated shall
not be allowed to alter the ditch without consent of the other persons.
312. Prohibition on use of water by one who does not make labor or
expenses in making ditch: (1) While making a new ditch or
repairing an old ditch, all persons who use the water of such ditch
have to make necessary labor or expenses in proportion to their
respective land.
A person who does not make labor or expenses in
making a new ditch or repairing an old ditch pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall not be entitled to use the water of such ditch.
313. Making ditch or using of water with mutual consent:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
there is a separate agreement between the concerned landowners or
those who make a ditch or users of water in relation to the making of
ditch or using of water for the cultivation of land, the ditch may be
made or water used according to the agreement.
314. Cultivation of land adjacent to river bank: If a river or stream
enters in a land and divides it or cuts a land, the land shall belong to
its owner and may be cultivated by the owner after the river or stream
changes its course and leaves the land.
315. Prohibition on registration: No person shall register in his/her name
any land that belongs to other person.
316. Transfer and transmission to be made: (1) If a person needs to have
transfer of a land on the death of its registration holder or to have
transmission of a land in which the person has got right in any manner,
the concerned person has to make an application to the Land Revenue
Office and obtain transfer and transmission within thirty five days of
the occurrence of such event.
If a person makes an application for transfer and
transmission after the expiry of the time limit referred to in subsection (1), the Land Revenue Office shall execute the transfer and
transmission of such land in the applicant's name by collecting the fee
of one hundred rupees irrespective of the length of post-expiry period.
317. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any activity done
pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six
months from the date of knowledge of the commission of such an act.

Chapter-5
Provisions Concerning Government, Public and Community Properties
318. Property to be deemed as government property: The following
property title to which belongs to, or which is owned, controlled by,
or subject to, the Government of Nepal shall be deemed to be the
government property:
Government houses, buildings or lands,
Roads, paths or railways,
Forests, or trees and bushes in forests,
Rivers, elevated parts of rivers, streams, rivulets, lakes, ponds
and banks thereof,
Canals, ditches or uncultivated, barren lands,
Terrains, mountains, rocks, sandy lands, gardens, or
Property other than the public, community, trust or any one's
private property.
319. Property to be deemed as public property: (1) The following
property which is for public purpose shall be deemed to be the public
property:
Houses, lands, sewerage or roads having been used since
ancient times,
Wells, water conduits, shores, wells, ponds and banks
thereof,
Exits for chattels, pasture lands, graveyards and lands
where these are located,
Inns, rest houses, monuments, religious meditation sites,
memorials, temples, shrines, Chaitya, monasteries,
Stupas, churches, courtyards, open parts of markets,
platforms or lands where these are located,
Lands where fairs, markets and public entertainment or
sports sites are located, or
Such other property as prescribed to be the public
property by the Government of Nepal, upon a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
The ownership of the public property shall vest in a
public organization or the Government of Nepal.
320. Property deemed to be community property: Any land held by a
community for its use, any structure built in such land or other
property owned and possessed by it shall be deemed to be the
community property.
321. Details to be updated: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall prepare
and update the following details in relation to the government and
public properties situated within the district:
The location where the government or public properties
are situated, plot number and area, in the case of a land,
and situation of the house, if any,
If the government or public properties are possessed by,
or subjected to, any body or organization, details thereof,
Other necessary details.
The Local Body shall render necessary assistance to the
Land Revenue Office in preparing the details as referred to in subsection (1).
After the preparation of the details pursuant to subsection (1), the Land Revenue Office shall forward a copy thereof
each to the District Administration Office and the concerned Local
Body.
The Local Body shall prepare and update the details as
referred to in sub-section (1) in relation to the community properties
situated within its jurisdiction.
322. Land ownership registration certificate to be provided: (1) If any
government land is held in the name of a government body or public
organization, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such a
body or organization and provide it to such a body or organization.
If any land is held in the name of a community in
accordance with laws, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such
community and provide it to that community.
323. Obligation to protect government, public or community
properties: (1) The Government of Nepal, public organization or
community holding the right in, possession of, and control over, the
government, public or community properties shall itself protect such
properties.
The District Administration Office and the concerned
Local Body shall be responsible for the protection of government and
public properties.
The concerned community and Local Body shall be
responsible for the protection of the community property.
324. Prohibition on registration of government, public or community
properties in individual's name: (1) No person shall register, or
cause to be registered, any government, public or community property
in his/her name.
If a person registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in his/her name, such
registration shall, ipso facto, be void.
If a complaint is filed as to the registration of any
government, public or community property in any person's name, the
Land Revenue Office shall also summon the presence of the
registration-holder and inquire into the manner and make necessary
decision within six months after the date of filing the complaint.
If the registration of any government, public or
community property in any person's name is revoked pursuant to this
Section, the Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary entries in the
records maintained in his/her Office and give information thereof to
the District Administration Office and the concerned Local Body.
A person who registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in contravention of this
Section shall be liable to the punishment by the Land Revenue Office
with a fine of ten thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees.
325. Prohibition on possession or cultivation of government, public
and community land: (1) No person shall, except with the approval
of the Government of Nepal, concerned public organization or
community, cultivate, or cause to be cultivated, any government,
public or community land.
No person shall possess any government, public or
community land by way of overlapping, encroachment, surrounding
or otherwise.
If any person possesses or cultivates any government,
public or community land in contravention of sub-section (1) or (2),
the concerned Land Revenue Office, in the case of the government or
public land, and the concerned Local Body, in the case of the
community land, shall separate such land, recover the crops yielded in
the land from that person and let it uncultivated.
The Land Revenue Office or concerned Local Body, as
the case may be, shall punish any person, who possesses or cultivates
any government, public or community land in contravention of this
Section, with a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
326. Prohibition on making construction in government, public or
community land: (1) No person shall build any structure in any
government, public or community land, for personal or public
purposes.
Provided that such structure may be made as considered
appropriate by the Government of Nepal, in the case of a government
or public land, and by the concerned community, in the case of a
community land.
If any person proceeds to make any structure in any
government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Body shall
have to stop such work immediately.
If any person has already made any structure in any
government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Body shall
have to give a time limit of fifteen days to the main person having
made the structure to demolish such structure.
The person having made such structure shall have to
demolish the structure at his/her own expense within the time limit
given pursuant to sub-section (3).
If the main person having made such structure fails to
demolish the structure within the time limit given pursuant to subsection (3), the concerned Chief District Officer shall have to
demolish such structure.
If the Chief District Officer demolishes any structure
pursuant to sub-section (5), the Chief District Officer shall recover the
expenses incurred in such demolition from the person and punish the
main person having made the structure with a fine not exceeding
twenty five thousand rupees.
It shall be the duty of the concerned Police Office to
render necessary assistance, if any, sought by the Local Body in
stopping the making of any structure or in demolishing any already
made structure pursuant to this Section.
327. Power to transfer government property: The Government of Nepal
may transfer any government property which is owned and possessed
by, or subjected to, some body or organization to any other body or
organization, with the approval of such owning body or organization.
328. Conversion of community property into public property: (1) If
any community holding any community property does not use it or
makes an application, signed by the main persons of all families of
such community, setting out that it is not necessary to use such
community property in its purpose, to the concerned Land Revenue
Office, the concerned Land Revenue Officer may make necessary
inquiry into the matter and convert such property into the public
property.
In the event of conversion of any community property
into the public property pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
Land Revenue Officer shall have to make necessary entries in the
records maintained in his/her Office and give information thereof to
the concerned District Administration Office and Local Body.
329. To reward complainant: (1) Any person may make a complaint
with the concerned body on the matters of registration, or aiding to the
registration, of a government, public or community property, or
possession, use or cultivation of a land under such property or
construction work done in such land, in contravention of this Chapter.
If, on inquiring into a complaint made pursuant to subsection (1), the complaint is held to be true, the concerned body shall
have to provide the complainant with a reward in a sum that is half the
fine imposed on the wrongdoer pursuant to this Chapter.
The concerned body may keep confidential a complaint
made pursuant to sub-section (1).
320. Departmental action to be taken: If any employee, either knowingly
or recklessly, registers, or causes to be registered, any government,
public or community property in the name of any person or if any
employee with the duty to render assistance pursuant to this Chapter
does not render any assistance, such employee shall be liable to
departmental action in accordance with law relating to the terms and
conditions of his/her service.
321. Government attorney empowered to file or make case, petition or
appeal:
(1) The concerned government attorney shall have power
to file or make a case, petition or appeal against any decision made by
some body or authority, adversely affecting any government, public or
community property.
The concerned office or authority shall have to provide
the government attorney with such documents and other assistance as
may be necessary in relation to the filing or making of a case, petition
or appeal pursuant to sub-section (1).
322. Limitation: A person may file a lawsuit at any time in the cases of
Sections 324, 325 and 326 of this Chapter, and a person who is
aggrieved from any act done in accordance with the other Sections of
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date on which such an act is done.

Chapter-6
Provisions Concerning Trusts
333. Trust deemed to be established: If a person makes necessary
arrangements for the operation and management of a property in
which the person has right, ownership and possession by another for
the benefit of beneficiary, a trust shall be deemed to be established.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"beneficiary" means persons, groups, general public, incorporated or
unincorporated bodies corporate or communities who get the benefit
from the trust property.
324. Trust may be public or private: (1) A trust may be either public or
private.
A trust established for the accomplishment of the
following object shall be deemed to be a public trust:
To establish, operate and use a fund for economic
development infrastructures or other development works,
To establish and operate a fund necessary for the
development of skills, generation of employment
opportunity and development of the people with low
income,
To operate social welfare programs,
To establish and operate such educational and academic
institutes like schools, colleges and universities as may
be useful for the general public,
To establish and operate dispensaries such as hospitals
and health posts for public purposes,
To protect natural, historical or cultural heritages or
promote such protection,
To operate wildlife, aquatic animals or environment
protection programs,
To operate programs relating to the upliftment or welfare
of women, children, indigenous/nationalities, downtrodden or backward classes or communities,
To operate programs relating to sports,
To carry out service-oriented welfare programs,
To operate rescue works,
To establish shrines, temples, monasteries, domes,
mosques, churches or carry out similar other religious
activities,
To operate other public programs for public interest.
A trust which is established with object to render benefit,
advantage or facility to any particular person or group shall be
deemed to be a private trust.
If a trust is established to accomplish both public and
private objects, such a trust shall be deemed to be a public trust.
335. Application to be made for establishment of trust: (1) A person or
organization who intends to establish a trust shall make an application,
setting out the following matters, to the Registrar:
Value and details of the property held for the trust,
Beneficiaries, and benefit and facility to them, details of
the terms and extent thereof,
If the trust is to be established for any particular period,
matters relating thereto,
Other necessary details.
In making an application pursuant to sub-section (1), the
following documents have also to be submitted along with the
application:
Instrument of the trust,
Trustee's name and photocopy of the deed relating to
his/her consent,
Photocopy of the deed, if any, executed for the
establishment of the trust,
Photocopy of a reliable deed relating to the trust settler's
identity, and, in the case of the trust settler being a body
corporate, certified copies of the documents relating to
the incorporation of the body corporate and of the
decision by such body corporate in relation to the
establishment of trust,
Receipt of payment of the fees chargeable by law for the
registration of trust.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter:
"Person" means a natural person or a body corporate is
competent to conclude a contract pursuant to this Code.
"Registrar" means the authority provided for by law for
the registration, supervision and liquidation of trusts, and
this term also includes the Land Revenue Officer in the
concerned district if such authority is not so provided for.
"Trustee" means the person who is responsible for the
operation and management of a trust property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a person has, by way of his/her oral behavior, conduct or a
testamentary gift or will, provided for the operation and management
of a property in which he/she has right, ownership and possession as a
trust, the trust shall be deemed to have been established by such
behavior, conduct or will.
Provided that in the case of a property requiring registration
pass for the transfer of its title in accordance with law, a deed
pertaining to such transfer has to be registered.
If a foreign person or body corporate intends to establish
a trust, the person or body has to make an application upon fulfilling
the procedures as referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2). A foreign
person or body corporate may be the founder of the trust to be so
established.
Provided that at least one trustee of the trustees of such a trust
has to have permanent residence in Nepal.
336. Details to be set out in instrument: The following matters have to be
set out in the instrument of a trust:
Names, surnames and addresses and founders of the trust,
and, if a body corporate is the founder, names, surnames
and addresses of the directors of such a body,
Objects and nature of the trust,
Names, surnames and addresses of the trustees,
description of work to be performed by them, and, if a
body corporate is a trustee, name, surname and address of
the person designated by the body to act as the trustee,
Details of the beneficiaries,
Method of use of the trust property,
Details of the tenure of the trustee, if any, so specified,
If the trustees are entitled to remuneration or other
facilities, details thereof and limitation,
If the trust is intended to be established for a certain
period, such a period,
In the event of termination of the trust, consequences
thereof,
Provisions relating to the operation, management and
monitoring of the trust property,
Other necessary matters.
337. Registration of a trust: (1) If an application is made for the
establishment of a trust pursuant to Section 335, the Registrar shall
make necessary inquiry into the objects of the trust and the details of
the property proposed for the establishment of the trust, and, if it
seems reasonable to register the trust, register the trust and issue the
trust registration certificate, within a period of thirty five days of the
making of such an application.
If a trust is registered pursuant to sub-section (1), the
trust is deemed to have been established.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a private trust may be operated even without registration.
338. Power to refuse registration of a trust: (1) Notwithstanding any
thing contained in Section 337, the Registrar may refuse to register a
trust in any of the following circumstances:
If the details, documents or fees as referred to in Section
335 are not mentioned or paid,
If the name of the trust resembles with the name of any
other trust which has already been registered before the
registration of the trust applied for,
If the objects or terms of the trust appear to be
inappropriate or undesirable for reasons of public interest,
decency, courtesy or public order, are not lawful or are
not possible to be implemented owing to their uncertainty
or vagueness.
If a trust is not capable of being registered pursuant to
sub-section (1), the Registrar shall give information, along with the
reason for refusal, to the applicant within thirty five days.
If, upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section (2),
the applicant, upon making necessary corrections, makes an
application again for the registration of the trust, the Registrar shall
register the trust and issue the registration certificate pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 337, within fifteen days of the making of such
an application.
339. Transfer of property to be made for incorporation of trust: (1)
The trust founder shall have to transfer the property settled for the
trust to the trustee within a period of three months of the
establishment of the trust.
If the property to be transferred pursuant to sub-section
(1) is an immovable property, such property shall be deemed to have
been duly transferred only when it is transferred in accordance with
A foreign person or body corporate that establishes a
trust in Nepal shall have to remit into Nepal a movable property equal
to at least one hundred thousand American dollars through regular
banking channel and hand over the same to the trustee within three
months.
The information of the handover of the movable property
pursuant to sub-section (3) has to be given to the Registrar.
340. Dissolution of a trust on failure of transfer of property: In the
event of failure to transfer property within the time-limit referred to in

Section 339, the registration of such a trust shall ipso facto be void
and the trust shall deemed to be dissolved.
341. Administration and use of trust property according to the
instrument: (1) The trustee shall have to administer and manage the
trust property subject to the terms and restrictions set forth in the
instrument.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, the
trustee shall, in administering and managing the property pursuant to
sub-section (1), not sell, mortgage, or otherwise transfer title to, the
immovable property or any part thereof without prior approval of the
concerned Registrar.
In asking for prior approval of the Registrar pursuant to
sub-section (2), the reason for the sale, mortgage of, or transfer of title
to, such property, and the reasons and grounds that it may result in
more benefit to the beneficiary have to be set out.
342. Duty to administer and manage trust property properly: (1) The
trustee shall have to administer and manage the trust property properly,
by exercising his/her capacity and diligence honestly.
In the administration and management of the trust
property pursuant to sub-section (1), the trustee shall have to make
arrangement to avoid any loss and damage to, and maintain
sustainability of, such a property.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, in the
administration and management of the trust property pursuant to subsections (1) and (2), income earned from the trust property which is
not required immediately to accomplish the objects of the trust may be
invested in the accomplishment of the objects of trust.
Except as otherwise mentioned in the instrument, in
making investment pursuant to sub-section (3), it may be invested as
follows in the following proportion of the total sum:
At least twenty five percent in the purchase of bonds or
treasury bills issued by the Government of Nepal or the
Nepal Rastra Bank or bonds guaranteed by the
Government of Nepal,
Deposit of a maximum of twenty five percent in a fixed
account with a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed account
with a development bank,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of
ordinary shares of a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed account
with a finance company,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of such
ordinary shares of an enlisted public limited company as
are dealt openly.
The trustee shall have to carry out updated monitoring as
to the investment made pursuant to sub-section (4); and if the returns
of investment made in one sector be lesser, such investment has to be
withdrawn immediately and made in another sector yielding more
returns, subject to the terms and restrictions of the investment.
In making monitoring or investment pursuant to subsection (5), opinion of an expert in the concerned sector may, as
required, be obtained.
The opinion obtained pursuant to sub-section (6) may be
taken as the basis for monitoring or investment.
The trustee shall have to maintain his/her personal
property and the trust property separately and administer and mange
the trust property accordingly; and in the event of a need to operate an
account, separate accounts have to be maintained.
343. Trustee to be appointed: (1) A trustee shall be appointed for the
administration, management, protection, care of the trust property and
use of benefits of such property to the benefit of the beneficiary or
making proper arrangements for the same.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, the
founder of trust shall appoint the trustee.
In the event of the failure to appoint or inability to
appoint a trustee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the founder of trust
himself or herself shall be deemed to be the trustee.
344. Disqualification of trustee: The following person shall not be
qualified to be a trustee:
A person who is not competent to make a contract,
A person who has embezzled property in his/her custody,
A person who is convicted by a court of the offense of
corruption,
A person who has been sentenced on a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude,
A person who is the sole beneficiary of the trust property.
345. Number of beneficiary: Except as otherwise provided for in the
instrument, the number of beneficiaries shall be one in minimum and
seven in maximum.
346. Body corporate being eligible to be a trustee: (1) A body corporate
which is established in accordance with law may be appointed as a
trustee.
In the event of appointment of a body corporate as
referred to in sub-section (1), the person working as the chief of such
body or a person to whom the power is delegated by a decision of the
board of directors of such body shall have to act on behalf of such
body.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "the
person working as the chief" means the chairperson, director,
managing director, general manager, executive director of such a body
or a person empowered by such a body to work as its chief.
347. Provisions concerning vacancy in office of a trustee: (1)
office of the trustee shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
If the person is not qualified to be a trustee,
If the person resigns from the office of a trustee,
If the person dies or is dissolved or liquidated or
insolvent in accordance with law,
If the trust is established for a certain period, the period is
completed,
If the trustee is appointed for certain tenure, the tenure is
completed,
If the trustee is removed by the trust founder or court on
the ground that he/she has embezzled the trust property
or has not taken a reasonable care of such property.
If the office of trustee is vacant pursuant to sub-section
(1), the office has to be filled in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the instrument.
In the event of failure to fill the office of trustee pursuant
to sub-section (2), the beneficiary, if available, and the concerned
Local Body, if there is no beneficiary or beneficiary cannot be
identified, shall make an application, accompanied by a list of
possible candidates, to the concerned District Court for the
appointment of a trustee.
If an application is made for the appointment of trustee
pursuant to sub-section (3), the concerned District Court shall, in tune
with the spirit of the instrument, appoint to the office of trustee an
appropriate person from the list of candidates provided by the
applicant.
If any trustee is relieved of his/her office by virtue of the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), he/she shall, as promptly
as possible, hand over the trust property in his/her custody, control or
use to other trustee; and he/she shall not get immunity from any kind
of liability or legal action for any act or action done or taken by
him/her while in office of trustee by the reason only that he/she has
been so relieved of office.
If the office of trustee of a public trust which has only
one trustee falls vacant or is fulfilled pursuant to this Section, the
information thereof has to be given to the Registrar.
348. To specify roll of succession of trustees: (1) Except as otherwise
mentioned as to the roll of succession of trustees in the instrument,
after the death of a trustee, his/her eldest son, daughter-in-law or
daughter shall succeed the office of trustee according to the roll of
succession; and if there is no one out of them, the person who is
entitled to inherit him/her shall inherit the office of trustee.
If a person who becomes the trustee pursuant to subsection (1) is not qualified to be the trustee, his/her guardian or person
taking care of him/her shall perform the obligation of the trustee on
his/her behalf until such person is disqualified.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, if
there is a provision that one's descendents are entitled to be the trustee,
the descendents of such person shall succeed the office of trustee
according to the limit of their respective rights; and in such a case, the
provisions contained in Section 345 shall not be applicable.
349. Requirement to perform obligation of trustee in special
circumstance: If there exists a situation that the office of a trustee
falls vacant in entirety and the office cannot be filled immediately
pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 347, the Local Body shall have
to function as the trustee until the office is so filled.
350. Requirement to operate trust by unanimity: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the instrument, the trust containing two or
more trustees has to be operated by unanimous decision of all the
trustees as far as possible.
In the event of failure to reach unanimity pursuant to subsection (1), the trust may be operated by a majority decision of the
then existing trustees, and if that is not possible, by the decision of the
eldest trustee.
351. To carry out object of trust: The trustee shall have to carry out the
object of a trust as set forth in the instrument of the trust, and in so
carrying out the object, the trustee shall have to discharge functions
honestly and according to his/her capacity and diligence.
352. To maintain records of trust property: (1) The trustee shall have to
prepare an inventory of the trust property and update the records
thereof, and, in the case of a public trust, a copy of such records has to
be submitted to the Registrar each year.
The inventory as referred to in sub-section (1) has to
reflect the movable and immovable property, loans, assets, or if such
property has been invested in any business, principal, interest or other
returns of such investment.
353. Protection of trust property: (1) The trustee shall have to maintain
and protect the trust property, and may make any kind of such legal
action or complete any kind of such formality with any public
authority as may be required for this purpose.
In maintaining or protecting the trust property, the trustee
shall take proper and reasonable care of, and do act conducive to the
enhancement of, the trustee property as if the property were his/her
354. Prohibition on possession and use of trust property in manner to
prejudice benefit of beneficiary: No trustee shall so possess or use
the trust property for himself or herself or other person as may be
prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary.
355. Duty to prevent loss to trust property: (1) It shall be the duty of the
trustee to prevent destruction, termination of, or otherwise loss to, the
trust property in a manner prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary
or contrary to the object of the trust.
If the trust property is not managed properly or is made
subject to cheating or fraud or is embezzled or used for other purposes,
any trustee or beneficiary may, subject to the provisions set forth in
the instrument, file a petition in the court for the prevention of such
embezzlement.
Provided that any person may file a petition in the cases of a
public trust.
If, upon a petition filed pursuant to sub-section (2), it is
held that the trust property has not been managed properly or has been
made subject to cheating or fraud or embezzled or used for other
purposes, the court shall recover the amount in question from the
embezzler and may also order compensation to be paid by a trustee if
the trustee has committed such an embezzlement.
356. To maintain accounts of a trust: (1) The trustee shall have to
maintain accounts in a manner to reflect clearly and actually the
accounts of the trust property, and provide statements thereof if the
Registrar, trust founder or beneficiary, if any identified, intends to
inspect the same.
In the case of a public trust, the trustee shall have its
accounts audited by a recognized auditor each year and submit a copy
of the audit report to the Registrar.
357. Breach of trust: (1) If a trustee fails to fulfill the duties required to be
fulfilled pursuant to this Chapter, the trustee shall be deemed to have
committed a breach of trust.
In the event of the breach of trust pursuant to sub-section
(1), the trustee so breaching trust shall be responsible for the loss and
damage caused to the beneficiary from such breach and bear liability
for the same.
In bearing the liability pursuant to sub-section (2), the
trustee breaching trust shall bear such profits as may be equal to the
income or profits which the trust or beneficiary would have made or
earned if the trust had not been breached.
If a trust has two or more trustees, all trustees who
commit a breach of trust shall collectively bear the liability for the
loss and damage caused from such breach of trust.
If, in relation to one portion of any trust, the trust is
breached, and, in relation to another portion of the trust, benefit is
derived, the trustee shall not use the benefit in the fulfillment of
his/her liability.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the trustee shall not bear the liability for the loss and damage
caused from the breach of trust committed by the trustee, in the
following circumstance:
If the loss and damage is caused by operation of law,
If the loss and damage is a result of the breach of trust by
any act done by the previous trustee or the consequence
thereof.
358. Deed of trust property to remain with trustee: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the instrument of a trust, the deeds,
documents of the ownership and possession of the trust property and
other proofs and evidences pertaining thereto shall all be in the
custody of the trustee, and in the case of a public trust, copies of such
deeds and documents shall be submitted to the Registrar.
Provided that in the case of the deeds, documents or evidences
required to be approved by the Registrar, it is not required to submit
the copies of such deeds, documents or evidences.
The trustee and the Registrar shall safely retain the deeds,
documents and evidences as referred to in sub-section (1).
359. Entitlement
reimbursement
trust
property:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
trustee has used his/her personal property or other's property in the
course of the protection of the trust property, accomplishment of the
object of trust or protection of the benefit of the beneficiary, the
trustee shall be entitled to have reimbursement of the amount for such
property from the trust property.
360. Other powers, duties and liabilities deemed to be vested with
trustee: Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, in
addition to the powers, duties and liabilities clearly set forth in this
Chapter, such other reasonable powers and duties as may be required
for the implementation and accomplishment of the object of trust, care
and protection of the trust property and protection of the rights and
benefits of the beneficiary shall be deemed to be vested with the
trustee.
361. Prohibited acts by trustee: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the instrument, no trustee shall do, or cause to be done, any of the
following acts:
To use the trust property in any manner other than in the
accomplishment of the object of trust,
To use, or caused to be used, the trust property in any act
yielding profit to the trustee himself or herself or any one
else, except in the accomplishment of the object of trust,
To delegate or hand over the responsibility or obligation
of trustee to another trustee or other person,
Provided that nothing shall bar the appointing of his/her
agent or attorney in the course of ordinary transaction or
assigning of any responsibility or obligation if such
responsibility or obligation is to be assigned in view of
the nature of such transaction or assigning of any
responsibility to another person with the consent of the
beneficiary, if any, identified.
To carry out any act relating to the trust solely contrary to

Section 350 if there are two or more trustees,
To obtain any remuneration, allowance or facility in
consideration for being the trustee,
Provided that nothing shall bar the receiving of
reasonable remuneration, allowance or facility for any
work done whole-time or part-time after establishing the
office or with the prior approval of the Registrar, without
prejudicing the object of the trust or benefit of the
beneficiary,
To purchase or otherwise pledge, mortgage, lease or rent
the property of the trust for which he/she is trustee before
at least three years of his/her assumption of, or retirement
from, the office of trustee.
The trustee shall not make any economic transaction
between his/her private property and the trust property. He/she has to
make compensation for the loss, if any, to the trust property from such
The trustee shall not merge his/her property with the trust
property.
362. To give direction to transfer trust property: Except as otherwise
provided for in the instrument, in the case of only one beneficiary,
after he/she becomes competent to enter into contract, and in the case
of two or more beneficiaries, after each of them becomes competent to
enter into contract and reach consensus, such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may direct the trustee to hand over the trust property to
him/her or them; and if any direction is so given, it shall be the duty of
the trustee to abide by such direction.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to the public trust.
363. Power to relinquish benefit of trust property: (1) In the case of a
private trust, the beneficiary who is competent to enter into contract
may, by a notice in writing to the trustee and the Registrar, relinquish
any or all of his/her entitlement, benefit, facility or interest from the
trust property.
If each and every beneficiary wholly relinquishes the
entitlement, benefit, facility or interest from the trust property
pursuant to sub-section (1), such trust shall be deemed to have been
dissolved.
364. Duty to maintain ownership of trust property: (1) The trust
property shall be entered as such in the records of trust and held in the
name of the person mentioned in the instrument or in the name of the
beneficiary if any such person is not mentioned in the instrument.
If, in the case of a public trust, the instrument provides
for the establishment of a separate body corporate for the
administration and management of the trust property, such property
shall be held in the name of the body corporate so established.
365. Alteration in object of trust: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if the trust founder considers appropriate to
make any amendment or alteration in the object set forth in the
instrument at the time of the creation of trust, he/she may make an
application, accompanied by the reason for such amendment or
alteration, to the Registrar.
If, on an inquiry into an application made pursuant to
sub-section (1), the reason for the amendment or alteration in the
object set forth in the instrument seems to be reasonable, the Registrar
may issue an order to or alter such object, and, if any order is so made,
the object set forth in the instrument shall be deemed to have been
amended or altered accordingly.
366. Trust property not to be counted: Any trust property administered
and managed by the trustee shall not be counted as the property of the
trustee for the purpose of assessment of tax or for any other purpose.
Provided that in the case of a person who derives any benefit,
facility or interest from such property, such benefit, facility or interest
shall be counted.
367. Consequence of dissolution of trust: (1) If a trust once established is
dissolved or become void for any reason, such dissolution or voidance
shall not affect any act already done.
In the event of dissolution or voidance of a trust pursuant
to sub-section (1), in the case of a public trust, except as otherwise
provided for in the instrument, the trustee may, by order of the
Registrar, hand over the trust property to any other trust with the
identical object or to any public organization with similar objects if
such other trust is not available; and in the case of a private trust, the
trustee shall hand over the trust property to the beneficiary, if he/she is
identified or to the nearest heir to the beneficiary if the beneficiary is
not available or to the trust founder if such heir is not available or to
the heir to the trust founder if even the trust founder is not available.
If the organization or person as referred to in sub-section
(2) is not available, the property of the dissolved or voided trust shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal.
368. Power to make appeal: A party who is not satisfied with any order or
decision made by the Registrar pursuant to this Chapter may make an
appeal to the concerned Appellate Court within a period of thirty five
days from the date of knowledge of such an order or a decision.
369. Not to affect other trust: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall
affect any trust which has been established and in operation at the
time of the commencement of this Code and enjoyment of any residue
upon carrying out the activity set forth in the memorandum of
donation of the concerned trust or as per the usages and customs.
Provided that such a trust has to be administered and managed
upon having it registered within three years of the commencement of
this Code.
370. Limitation: (1) There shall be no limitation in relation to the
following matters where a person who is aggrieved from any activity
carried out pursuant to this Chapter is to make a lawsuit:
Embezzlement of the trust property,
Fraud or forgery in any deed relating to the trust property,
Embezzlement or misappropriation of the trust property,
Derivation of benefit by the trustee in contravention of
the terms of the instrument of the trust,
Restitution of the trust property or its value or income
from the trustee or other person.
A lawsuit may be file within a period of six months from
the date of cause of action in relation to any matters other than those
set forth in sub-section (1).

Chapter-7
Provisions Concerning Usufruct
371. Usufruct deemed to be constituted: (1) When a person gives free a
property in which he/she has right and ownership and fruits, benefit,
income or facility of the property to another person entitling that other
person to enjoy such property and fruits, benefit, income or facility
thereof, usufruct shall be deemed to be constituted.
The provisions of usufruct shall be as set forth in a will
or a contract entered into between the concerned persons.
Provided that in giving usufruct with effect from testament, it
may be given by way of a will.
372. Usufruct to be effective: (1) The provision of usufruct constituted by
a contract shall become effective on the date of the commencement of
the contract unless otherwise set forth in the contract.
The provision of usufruct constituted by a will shall
become effective in accordance with the term of effectiveness of the
will, and failing such terms, on the date of the effectiveness or the
date of conclusion of the will.
The provision of usufruct so given as to be effective on
testament shall become effective after the death of the person
executing such will.
373. Deed to be executed: (1) In giving an immovable property in
usufruct, its owner has to execute a deed to that effect in accordance
with law.
In giving a property in common in usufruct, consent of
the coparceners has to be obtained.
374. Entitlement of usufructuary to enjoy property as if it belonges to
him/her: (1) If a person gives another person his/her property in
usufruct, the usufructuary of such property shall be entitled to enjoy
the property, fruits, benefit, income or facility to be yielded or earned
from the property and fruits, benefit, income or facility accrued from
the property as if it were his/her own property.
If there are two or more usufructuaries obtaining a
property pursuant to sub-section (1), each usufructuary shall be
entitled to enjoy that property jointly or severally.
If a property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
partitioned, each coparcener who is entitled to enjoy the property in
usufruct shall be entitled to enjoy the property pursuant to sub-section
A usufructuary may make a lawsuit in the court, as
required, for the protection or enjoyment of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct.
375. Property
which
usufructuary
entitled
enjoy:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 374, a usufructuary
shall not be entitled to enjoy the following properties relating to the
property obtained under the provision of usufruct:
Mines and minerals related with the property,
Provided that where the mines are the subject of
usufruct, the mines may be enjoyed.
Grown trees.
Provided that fruits, flowers or other products
obtained from trees may be enjoyed.
376. Prohibition on alteration in structure of property without
consent: The usufructuary shall not be entitled to significantly alter
the substance or form of the property obtained under the provision of
usufruct or to destroy such property, except with the prior approval of
the owner.
Provided that if the enjoyment of the property given under the
provision of usufruct is not possible without an alteration in the form
of or destruction of the property, except as otherwise provided for in
the contract or will, the property may be enjoyed by altering its form
or destroying it, on payment of the price that may be set at the time of
returning such property back.
377. Power to rent, lease or mortgage property under provision of
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary may, if he/she so desires, rent, lease or
mortgage the property obtained under the provision of usufruct, by
executing a deed to that effect.
Provided that:
It is not required to execute a deed for renting a property
for a monthly rent not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
Where a property is so rented, leased or mortgaged, the
usufructuary has to give information thereof to the owner.
The property obtained under the provision of usufruct
may not be rented, leased or mortgaged for a period that
exceeds the validity period of usufruct.
In renting, leasing or mortgaging the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct, the relevant deed shall also indicate
that the property is under the provision of usufruct.
Where a rent, lease or mortgage of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct is executed in contravention of the
provisions set forth in sub-sections (1) and (2), such transaction shall
ipso facto be void.
A person who obtains a property on rent, lease or
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be entitled to enjoy the
property as if the person were the usufructuary.
378. Duty to maintain and care property under the provision of
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary has to maintain and take care of the
property which he/she has obtained under the provision of usufruct
properly and reasonably as if it were his/her own property.
If a person obtains a property under the provision of
usufruct by way of rent, lease or mortgage, the person has to take care
of such property properly and reasonably.
The usufructuary has to maintain the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct at his/her cost.
Provided that in the event of a need to maintain such property
by spending a substantial amount in consequence of a natural calamity,
the usufructuary has to give information thereof to the owner, and the
owner has to bear such maintenance expenses.
379. Prohibition on damaging property obtained under the provision
of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary shall not damage, or cause to be
damaged, the property obtained under the provision of usufruct.
If such property is damaged in any manner in the course
of its enjoyment by the usufructuary or a person who obtains it on rent,
lease or mortgage pursuant to Section 377, the usufructuary shall be
liable for it.
Provided that the usufructuary shall not be liable for any
damage caused to such property by a natural calamity.
The usufructuary may make or adopt insurance or other
necessary preventive measures for the protection of the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct against possible damage in
the course of its enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2).
380. Usufructuary to bear annual tax or fees: The usufructuary has to
pay such tax or fees as may be leviable by law in relation to the
property obtained under the provision of usufruct.
Provided that the owner shall bear the property tax payable for
the property given under the provision of usufruct.
381. Information of claim or interference by any one to be given to
owner: (1) If any one makes encroachment, claim or interference on
or with the property under the provision of usufruct, the usufructuary
has to give information thereof to the owner within fifteen days of
such encroachment, claim or interference.
The usufructuary who does not give information pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be liable to any consequence thereof.
382. Validity period of provision of usufruct: (1) The provision of
usufruct shall remain valid for the period set forth in the contract or
will.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the provision of usufruct shall not remain valid beyond the following
period except as otherwise provided for in the contract or will:
Where the usufructuary is a natural person, the death of
the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of forty
nine years since the execution of the provision of
usufruct, whichever occurs earlier,
Where the usufructuary is a legal person, the dissolution
of the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of twenty
nine years since the execution of the provision of
usufruct, whichever occurs earlier.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"dissolution" includes the termination, liquidation,
revocation of registration or insolvency of a legal person.
In the case of more than one usufructuary, the property in
usufruct shall devolve on the owner in proportion to the death or
dissolution of any usufructuary, except as otherwise provided for in
the contract or will.
383. Power to cancel provision of usufruct: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 382, if the usufructuary damages or
misuses the property obtained under the provision of usufruct or does
not enjoy it for the purpose for which it has been given in usufruct or
otherwise does any act that prejudices the right of the owner in such
property, the concerned owner may cancel the provision of usufruct at
any time.
In the event of cancellation of the provision of usufruct
pursuant to sub-section (1), the usufructuary has to return the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct.
384. Power to return property by usufructuary: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 382 or 383, if the usufructuary does not
wish to enjoy the property obtained under the provision of usufruct,
the usufructuary may return such property to the owner at any time,
by giving a notice of at least forty five days.
385. Usufruct deemed to be extinguished: (1) The provision of usufruct
shall be deemed to be extinguished in any of the following
circumstances:
If the validity period of usufruct expires pursuant to

Section 382,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“usufruct expires" means:
If two or more natural persons are usufructuary, the
usufruct shall be deemed to lapse on the date on
which the last survivor usufructuary dies.
If two or more legal persons are usufructuary, the
usufruct shall be deemed to lapse on the date on
which the last usufructuary is dissolved.
If the property is returned on the cancellation of usufruct
pursuant to Section 383,
If the usufructuary returns the property in usufruct
pursuant to Section 384,
If, except for a reasonable ground, the usufructuary fails
to enjoy the property in usufruct until six months after
the date on which the provision of usufruct becomes
effective,
If the specific purpose for the accomplishment of which
the provision of usufruct has been made is accomplished,
If the property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
not capable of being transferred to the usufructuary in
accordance with law,
If the property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
lost totally.
In the event of the extinguishment of the provision of
usufruct pursuant to sub-section (1), the property given to any person
in usufruct shall ipso facto devolve on the owner except in the
circumstance set forth in clause (f) or (g).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), where a property is given in usufruct on the condition that it shall
remain valid until a person attains a certain age, the provision of
usufruct shall remain valid until the date on which the person attains
that age even if the person dies before the date of attainment of such
386. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of knowledge of the commission of such act.

Chapter-8
Provisions Concerning Servitudes
387. Servitude to be deemed: (1) If there is a provision entitling the
owner of an immovable property to enjoy or use any immovable
property or any part thereof in which another person has title,
ownership or possession, a servitude shall be deemed to have been
created.
(2) A servitude shall be in existence in accordance with the
contract, nature, customs and usages of the place where the
immovable property is located.
388. Servitude to be allowed: (1) If there is a provision of servitude
pursuant to Section 387, the owner of the concerned immovable
property shall allow another person to enjoy or use the immovable
property in accordance with the provision of servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
there is a provision of servitude for public purposes, such a servitude
may also be used for personal purpose as well.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a servitude created by operation of law may be used in
accordance with law.
389. Servitude not to be adversely affected by transfer of immovable
property: (1) A servitude in a servient immovable property shall
continue to exist even if the owner of such immovable property
transfers all or any of such property in which he/she has right and
ownership to another person in any manner.
Even if the servient immovable property is partitioned,
each coparcener shall be deemed to have provided such servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if, while transferring or partitioning a servient immovable
property, there is a provision of servitude elsewhere in such property
and servitude is not thus required to be provided in the immovable
property in which a person acquires right by way of such transfer or
partition, the servitude shall be deemed to extinguish to that extent.
390. To allow enjoyment or use: (1) If any land in which a person has
title, ownership or possession has been in use since ancient time as a
public or community road, cattle exit, pasture land, ditch, cannel, quay,
pond, public road, track road or main road, inn, tomb, graveyard,
shrine, temple, monastery, dome, mosque or church, community
school, hospital or similar other public site, the land has to be allowed
to be used accordingly for the particular purpose.
The owner or possessor of the servient land shall not
cultivate or use, make any structure in or otherwise own or possess it
in such a manner as to adversely affect the provision set forth in subsection (1).
391. Use of neighbor's house or land at time of natural calamity: If, at
the time of natural calamity such as fire, earthquake, volcano and
flood, it is not possible to rescue victims of such calamity without
entering or using the house or land of a person, the victims may be
rescued, or cause to be rescued, by entering the house or land with the
consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is available and
even without consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is
not available for the time being or refuses to give consent.
Provided that compensation for any loss or damage caused from
such entry shall be provided to the owner of house or land concerned.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "the owner of
house or land" means the person who is using, possessing or
controlling the concerned house or land for the time being.
392. Acquisition of servitude of passage: (1) If the passage originally
available to have access to and from a house or land is destroyed due
to a natural calamity, a person who has been using the passage to and
from such house or land from the past shall have the servitude of a
reasonable passage to the public road.
A person who uses the passage to be maintained pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall provide a reasonable compensation to the
owner of house or land concerned.
A person shall not be entitled to demand the servitude of
passage from the owners of all houses or land pursuant to sub-section
(1); and he/she may demand such servitude from the owner of the
house or land through which the distance to the public road is the
shortest.
393. Prohibition on transfer of house or land without provision of
passage or exit: (1) In setting aside and transferring any part of the
house or land with the provision of passage or exit, such house or land
shall not transferred without making provision of passage or exit to
both purchaser and seller.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
there is another passage or exit to and from such house or land, it is
not required to make provision of passage or exit.
394. Power to extent basic services: If it is not possible to provide basic
services such as sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas and telephone
service to the house of a person through his/her own land or public,
government or community land, the person shall be entitled to lay
pipe or line in such a manner as not to cause any loss or damage to the
owner of such land.
Provided that in so providing the basic services through the
land of another person, the recipient of the services shall provide a
reasonable compensation to the owner of the land concerned.
395. Power to use river or stream or river or stream bank: Any person
may carry out movement, navigation, boating or fishing in the river or
stream which is situated in, or originated from, the personal property
of any person or within the zone of a maximum of three meters in
either side of such river or stream.
Provided that such activity is not allowed in small rivulets that
do not have perennial flow of water.
396. Power to use exit road: (1) If a river or stream is diverted or a
reservoir is built or a dam is made for any reason in the river or stream,
the owner of land concerned shall provide a reasonable exit for the
general public and livestock to have access to and from such diversion,
reservoir or dam.
Provided that an appropriate compensation has to be provided
to the owner of land concerned for the land used in the provision of
such access.
If, in maintaining the provision of exit passage as
referred to in sub-section (1), it is possible to maintain such exit
passage through the land of two or more persons, the exit passage
shall, unless provided otherwise, be maintained through the nearest
land that is technically feasible for the access to the diversion,
reservoir or dam.
397. Prohibition on prevention of natural flow of water: (1) The owner
of each house or land shall himself or herself manage the rain water
flowing from his/her house or land.
If there is no provision as referred to in sub-section (1),
the rain water has to be allowed to make its natural course.
Provided that no water has to be let to so flow as to cause
adverse effect on the downstream land by making a ditch, controlling
floods or otherwise diverting the flow or through human intervention.
398. Right to use stream, river or pond water: Any person may use the
stream or river which is originated from or flows through or the pond
water which is situated in the land of another person.
399. Requirement to allow passage or exit for farming: (1) If a person
does not have a passage or exit for people or livestock to have access
to and from his/her farm land and needs such passage or exit, the
owner of land concerned shall provide the facility of passage or exit to
such person.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to provide such
passage or exit through the house and compound land.
A person who uses the passage or exit pursuant to subsection (1) shall use in such a way that no loss or damage is caused to
the crops or other property of the person providing such passage or
exit.
If any loss or damage is caused to any crops or property
by the use of the passage or exit pursuant to sub-section (2), the
person using the passage or exit shall provide compensation to the
owner of land concerned for the crops or other property so lost or
damaged.
400. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of knowledge of the commission of such act.

Chapter-9
Provisions Concerning House Rent
401. House deemed to be rented: If a person who has title, possession or
ownership in a house lends the house to another person to use it for a
certain period of time, the rent shall be deemed to be created.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"house" means any house, storey, unit or room of the house or land or
cartilage occupied by the land.
402. Prohibition on renting unsafe house: No person shall rent a house
which is not safe for human habitation from health and security
perspectives.
Provided that the standards of house for non-residential
purposes such as a warehouse, livestock farming, storage and cold
storage shall be as specified in the house rent agreement.
403. Period of house rent: (1) The period of house rent shall be as set
forth in the agreement, with a maximum period of rent being five
years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
after the expiration of the period of house rent, the period may be
extended at times with the consent of the house owner and the tenant.
404. Agreement to be made while renting: (1) While renting a house, its
owner shall enter into an agreement in writing with the tenant, setting
out the following matters:
Full names and addresses of the owner and the tenant, their
citizenship number, and passport or identification certificate, in
the case of a foreigner,
Place and plot number of land where the house is located,
Purpose for rent,
Date of commencement of rent,
Validity period of rent,
Monthly rent,
Time and mode of payment of rent amount,
Liability to pay tariffs of electricity, water supply, telephone etc.
used in the house,
If the house rent tax is chargeable, matter on payment of the tax,
If the rented house is to be insured, matter relating to the
insurance,
Matter on leaving the rented house and eviction of the tenant
from it,
Matter as to whether the rented house can be sublet to another,
Other necessary matters.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it
is not necessary to enter into an agreement in writing with the tenant if
the monthly house rent does not exceed ten thousand rupees.
A photograph of tenant has also to be affixed to the
agreement referred to in sub-section (1).
The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) has also to
be signed by at least two witnesses of each side, namely the house
owner and the tenant, and a copy thereof has to be retained by each of
the owner and the tenant.
After the completion of the procedures as referred to in
sub-section (4), an agreement shall be deemed to have been entered
into between the house owner and the tenant.
405. Details of house to be provided: In renting a house, the owner shall,
at the time of entering into agreement, disclose defect or fault, if any,
in the structure of the house to the tenant.
406. Preparation of description of goods or chattels: (1) The house
owner shall, prior to renting his/her house, prepare a description of
goods or chattels in the house to be rented.
If the tenant is to use the goods or chattels set forth in the
description prepared pursuant to sub-section (1), he/she has to receive
such goods or chattels and give a receipt thereof to the house owner.
407. Obligation of house owner: The obligations of the house owner shall
be as follows:
To allow the tenant to use the house in accordance with the
agreement,
To arrange for such water and electricity supply, sewerage and
sanitation in the rented house as may be required, except as
otherwise provided for in the agreement,
To prevent the tenant from insecurity, harassment or unrest
from other persons dwelling in the house,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
408. Obligation of tenant: The obligations of the tenant shall be as
follows:
To pay the rent to the house owner within the specified period,
To maintain sanitation in, and take care of, protect and
safeguard, the house rented as if it were his/her own,
Not to do any act such a causing unrest, harassment or
insecurity to the other dwellers in the house or neighbors,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
409. Mode and procedures of payment of rent: (1) The tenant has to pay
the rent to the house owner in accordance with the mode and
procedures set forth in the agreement.
If the agreement does not provide for the mode and
procedures of the payment of rent pursuant to sub-section (1), the
tenant shall pay the rent to the house owner within seven days of the
expiry of each month.
The rent may be paid by way of cheque or in cash
pursuant to sub-section (2).
If the owner has received the rent in cash pursuant to this
Section, he/she has to give a receipt thereof to the tenant.
410. Obligation to pay tax and other charge: (1) Except as otherwise set
forth in the agreement, it shall be the obligation of the land owner to
pay the tax and other charge leviable by law in relation to the house
rented.
If it is the obligation of the land owner to pay tax or
charge pursuant to sub-section (1) and the land owner fails to pay the
tax or charge in time, the tenant may pay such tax or charge.
If the tenant pays the tax or charge pursuant to subsection (2), he/she shall be entitled to deduct such amount from the
rent payable to the land owner.
411. Insurance of house to be made: (1) A tenant who rents a house for
industrial or business purpose has to procure the insurance of the
house for its security.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"industrial or business purpose" means the operation of an industry or
carrying on a business or trade by a departmental store or one or more
than one shop.
If the person obliged to procure insurance pursuant to
sub-section (1) fails to procure insurance of the house and the house is
damaged by such cause as natural calamity, unrest, riot or fire, the
tenant shall be liable for such damage.
412. Repair and maintenance of house rented: (1) Except as otherwise
set forth in the agreement, the tenant shall be obliged to repair and
maintain the house rented, as required.
If the agreement provides that the land owner is obliged
to repair and maintain the house rented and it is necessary to carry out
any repair and maintenance of the house, the tenant shall give a notice
in writing to the land owner in time.
If the land owner fails to repair and maintain the house
rented despite the notice given pursuant to sub-section (2), the tenant
himself or herself may repair and maintain such house.
The tenant shall be entitled to deduct the amount of
expenses incurred in the repair and maintenance carried out pursuant
to sub-section (3) from the rent payable to the land owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the land owner shall not be bound to pay such expenses incurred in
the repair and maintenance of the house as may be unusual or
unnecessary.
413. Subletting house rented to other person: (1) If the agreement
entered into with the land owner provides that the tenant may sublet
the whole or any portion of the house rented by him/her to another
person, the tenant may, subject to the agreement, sublet the whole or
any portion of such house to another person.
If the tenant sublets the whole or any portion of the house
rented to another person pursuant to sub-section (1), the tenant shall
give information in writing indicating the name and address of the
sub-tenant to the house owner within fifteen days.
A sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-section
(1) has to pay the rent of the house or its portion to the tenant who has
so sublet.
The sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) shall, while dwelling in the rented house, abide by all such
terms and provisions as required to be abided by the tenant pursuant to
this Chapter.
If the sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) fails to act in accordance with the terms while dwelling in
the rented house or fails to maintain sanitation in the house or fails to
protect or safeguard it or carries out any act such as causing
harassment, pain or unrest to the other dwellers of the house or
neighbors, the tenant or the house owner may evict the sub-tenant
from the house at any time.
414. Prohibition on alteration in structure without consent: (1) Except
as otherwise provided for in the agreement, the tenant shall not be
allowed to demolish, remove or disorder any structure of the house
rented or add any part to the house or otherwise alter it without the
house owner's consent in writing.
If the tenant does any act in contravention of sub-section
(1) and causes any loss to the house owner, then the house owner shall
be entitled to compensation for the loss caused to him/her from the
tenant.
415. Prohibition on the use of house contrary to agreement: The tenant
shall not be allowed to use the house for any purpose other than that
for which he/she has rented the house, without prior consent of the
house owner.
416. Alteration in agreement: The house owner and the tenant may with
mutual consent make necessary alteration in the house rent agreement.
Provided that if such agreement is registered pursuant to this
Code, alteration has to be made upon making an application to the
concerned body.
417. Power to inspect: (1) The house owner may, by an advance notice to
the tenant, inspect the rented house from time to time.
If the house owner intends to inspect the rented house
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the tenant to allow
the house owner to inspect the house.
418. Leaving rented house: (1) A tenant may leave the rented house prior
to the expiration of the period of rent in the following circumstance:
If the house owner fails to perform his/her duties
pursuant to Section 407,
If the tenant does not require the house for the purpose
for which he/she has rented the house, or
If the house owner commits any act in contravention of
the agreement or this Chapter.
If the tenant has to leave the house in the circumstance
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), except as otherwise
provided for in the agreement, the tenant has to give a notice in
writing to the house owner in advance of at least thirty five days.
If the tenant leaves the house without giving a notice
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house owner shall be entitled to deduct
the rent for that period from the rent, if any, paid in advance by the
tenant and to recover the same from the tenant, failing such advance
payment.
419. Power to evict tenant: (1) The house owner may evict the tenant
from the house in the following circumstance:
If the tenant fails to perform his/her duties pursuant to

Section 408,
If the tenant commits within the rented house any offense
related activity prohibited by law,
If the house owner needs the house for himself or herself,
If it is necessary to repair and maintain the house by
removing inhabitants from the house,
If it is not appropriate for human habitation in the rented
house from technical and health perspectives,
If the period of house rent expires,
If the tenant commits any act in contravention of the
agreement or this Chapter, or
If the circumstance as referred to in sub-section (5) of

Section 413.
If it is necessary to evict the tenant from the house in the
circumstance referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the land
owner has to give a notice in writing to the tenant in advance of at
least thirty five days.
If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house owner is not entitled to rent
such house to another person before three months, without using the
same on his/her own.
If the house owner is to rent such house to another person
pursuant to sub-section (3) and the previous tenant intends to rent
such house, he/she shall get priority.
420. House rent agreement deemed to be terminated: A house rent
agreement entered into pursuant to Section 404 shall be deemed to be
terminated in the following circumstance:
If the tenant leaves the house,
If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house,
If the house owner and the tenant cancel the agreement with
mutual consent, or
If the period of house rent expires.
421. Obligation to hand over goods or chattels in good condition: (1)
The tenant shall, while leaving the rented house, count the goods or
chattels in his/her custody and clean and color the house, if required,
and hand over the same in good condition to the house owner.
If the tenant looses or damages any goods or chattels in
his/her custody, the tenant has to hand over similar goods or chattels
or pay a sum of money as per the prevailing price of such goods or
chattels to the house owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the tenant shall not be bound to reimburse for such goods or chattels
which are depreciable or destroyable in the course of daily use or to
pay price of such goods or chattels.
422. Power to rent house to another person: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a tenant disappears
without paying the rent for three months or more without notice and
the tenant is not found despite a public notice or correspondence with
his/her address or the tenant or his/her heir or agent does not show up
despite that he/she has been found, the house owner may count the
belongings of the tenant and hand over the custody of such belongings
to himself or herself or another person, in witness of a representative
of the Local Body, police employee and two local gentlepersons if
such employee is not available, and rent such house to another person.
If the tenant who has disappeared as mentioned in subsection (1) shows up or send his/her agent within six months, the
house owner shall collect the remaining rent and return such
belongings to the tenant.
If the tenant does not show up or send any agent even
within the time limit referred to in sub-section (2), the house owner
may, by giving information to the Local Body and the nearest police
employee, exclusively deal with such belongings.
423. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of commission of such an act.

Chapter-10
Provisions Concerning Donation and Gift
424. Donation or gift deemed to be effected: (1) Provision gratuitously
by a person of a property in which the person has title and ownership
to another person or organization for any religious, social, public or
community purpose or for the benefit of any person shall be deemed
to be a donation.
Provided that no donation may be made to the heir.
Provision gratuitously by a person of a property in which
the person has title and ownership to another person as a reward or
prize in consideration on account of merits to him/her by other person
by way of fostering him/her or otherwise or for family love and
affection shall be deemed to be a gift.
425. Prohibition on donating or gifting other's property: No person
shall donate or gift a property in which another person has title and
ownership.
426. Prohibition on donation or gift in duplication: No one shall donate
or gift the same property to another person that one has already
donated or gifted to someone else.
In the event of execution of donation or gift by one in
duplication in contravention of sub-section (1), in the case of the
donation or gift of an immovable property, the latter donation or gift
shall not be legally valid, and in the case of the donation or gift of a
movable property, the donation or gift to one who obtains the property
earlier shall be valid.
427. Donation or gift within immediate or testamentary effect: A
person may donate or gift his/her property to another person, with the
immediate or testamentary effect.
428. Execution of donation or gift jointly: (1) A person may donate or
gift his/her property jointly to more than one person or organization.
If a person donates or gifts his/her property jointly to
more than one person or organization, the receivers of such donation
or gift shall be deemed to have received the donation or gift in
proportion to that received by them each.
In the absence of a deed on donation or gift specifying
the portion of entitlement of receivers to the donated or gifted
property, all receivers of donation or gift shall be deemed to have
equal share in such donation or gift.
429. Person competent to make donation or gift: (1) A person who is
competent to enter into a contract and has the power to transfer a
property may donate or gift his/her property.
The competency of a person to enter into a contract
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be determined as of the time of the
making of donation or gift of a property.
430. Guardian not entitled to make donation or gift: No guardian shall
be entitled to donate or gift the property of a person who is under
his/her guardianship or custody to any one, on behalf of that person.
431. Acceptance of donation or gift on behalf of incompetent and
quasi-competent person or unborn baby: The father, mother or
guardian may, on behalf of an incompetent and quasi-competent
person or unborn baby, accept a donation or gift of a property.
432. Execution of deed on donation or gift: In making a donation or gift
of one's property to another, one has to execute a deed to that effect in
accordance with law.
Provided that in donating or gifting cash or any movable
property not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, such donation
or gift may be made orally instead of executing a deed.
433. Estoppel to be made on announcement to make donation: Where,
in a public ceremony organized for any purpose, one makes a deed or
public announcement to donate a certain amount or property for that
purpose, one shall be estopped from subsequently refusing to make
such donation.
434. Entitlement to compensation: If the receiver of donation or gift is
aggrieved by being unable to enjoy such property in consequence of
any act done pursuant to Section 425, 426 or 433, the receiver shall be
entitled to have a reasonable compensation from the person making
donation or gift.
Provided that if a person accepts the donation or gift of such
property despite the knowledge of the circumstance as referred to in

Section 425 or 426, the person shall not be entitled to compensation.
435. Donation or gift to be void: Any donation or gift made shall ipso
facto be void, in any of the following circumstances:
If the person or organization entitling to donation or gift
does not accept the donated or gifted property oneself or
through own agent,
If a property is donated or gifted to a person with
entitlement after testament and the receiver of donation
or gift dies before the person making such donation or
gift,
If a property is donated or gifted to an unborn baby and
the baby is not born alive.
436. Power to have donation or gift voided: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, one who donates or
gifts may cause the donation or gift to be void in any of the following
circumstances:
If he/she donates or gifts a property in which another
person has title and ownership,
If any property is donated or gifted without obtaining the
consent of another person where such consent is needed
pursuant to law,
If one who donates or gifts of any property is an
incompetent or quasi-competent person, or
If the donation or gift of any property is made without
fulfilling the legal requirements.
In the case of a donation or gift made without the consent
of another person pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1) where such
consent is required, the property shall be void to the extent of such
consent being not taken.
437. Right to revoke gift: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, one who gifts with testamentary effect may
revoke the gift at any time in any of the following circumstances:
If the receiver of gift commits or attempts to commit any
criminal offense against the person who gifts or his/her
family,
If the receiver of a gift makes a false allegation or
accusation against the person who gifts or his/her family,
If a deed of gift provides that the receiver of gift shall
perform any function, duty or liability and the receiver of
gift fails to perform such a function, duty or liability.
438. Application to be made for revocation of gift with testament: (1) If,
for any circumstance set forth in Section 437, a person intends to have
revocation of a gift with testament, the person shall have to make an
application, accompanied by the fee of one hundred rupees, to the
office where the deed of gift was executed.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office shall revoke the gift if, on necessary inquiry made
into whether the gift is liable to be revoked as per the application,
such gift appears to be revocable, and make entries thereof in the
records maintained in the office and give information thereof to the
receiver of gift within fifteen days.
439. Acquisition of right in property of donation or gift: The receiver
person or organization of donation or gift shall acquire the following
right in the property of donation or gift:
If the donation or gift is to be effective with testament of
the person who donates or gifts, after the death of such a
person who donates or gifts,
If the deed of donation or gift does not specify any time
for it to be effective, from the date of the execution of the
deed.
440. Limitation: Except as specified a limitation by this Chapter in
relation to file a complaint, a person who is aggrieved from any act
done pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of
following time limit after the date of the commission of that act:
Three months in the case of the matters set forth in

Section 433,
Within two years after the date of maturation of the right
of that person, in the case of acquisition of donation or
gift, and after the date of possession and enjoyment upon
maturing the right of the receiver on the matters of
donation or gift not allowed to be made.

Chapter-11
Provisions Concerning Transfer and Acquisition of Property
441. Property deemed to be transferred: If a person sells or otherwise
transfers a property in which he/she has title or ownership to another
person, the property shall be deemed to have been transferred to that
person.
442. Right to transfer property with immediate or testamentary effect:
A person may, subject to this Chapter, transfer the title in his/her
property to another person within immediate or testamentary effect.
443. Ownership devolving on transferee of property: (1) In the event of
transfer by a person of his/her property to another person pursuant to

Section 442, his/her ownership in that property shall cease to exist
from the date of such transfer and the transferee shall have ownership
in such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a person transfers the right in his/her property to be effective
with testament, the transferee shall have ownership in such property
only after the death of the transferor.
444. Power to transfer personal property: A person may transfer his/her
personal property to another person without other's consent.
445. Power to transfer joint property: (1) A joint property may be
transferred with the consent of all owners of such property.
If all owners do not agree to transfer the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (1), any owner may transfer the property of
his/her right or portion.
If, in making a transfer pursuant to sub-section (1), it is
technically not possible to set aside the title or portion of any owner
from the joint property, and another owner intends to acquire such
property, he/she shall be entitled to acquire it at the price mutually
agreed upon between them.
If more than two or more owners intend to acquire the
joint property, the owner who agrees to pay the highest price shall be
entitled to acquire such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if
the other owners do not intend to acquire the title or portion of any
owner and it is not possible technically to set aside such property and
sell it, the whole of the joint property has to be sold and the proceeds
of sale divided between the owners according to their respective title
or portion in that property.
If a person transfers the joint property in contravention of
sub-section (1), only the transfer of the extent of his/her title or
portion in such property shall be valid; and the concerned person shall
be entitled to get return of the property transferred in excess of the
right or portion of the transferor.
446. Prohibition on transfer of property in common without consent:
(1) No person shall transfer a property in common to another person
without obtaining written consent of the coparceners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the coparceners witness the deed of transfer of the property in
common, such coparceners shall be deemed to have given consent.
If a person transfers a property in common in
contravention of sub-section (1), the transfer of only the right or share
of such person in the property shall be valid. The concerned
coparcener shall be entitled to redeem the property transferred in
excess of the right or share of the transferor.
447. Power to transfer property in common for household purpose:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 446, the head of house
may, for the household purpose, sell whole of the property in common,
in the case of a movable property, and the half of such property, in the
case of an immovable property, without consent of others.
448. Prohibition on transferring other's property: (1) No person shall
transfer a property in which another person has title and ownership.
In the event of transfer of a property by a person in
contravention of sub-section (1), such deed or transaction shall be
void.
If the real owner makes a claim in the property
transferred pursuant to sub-section (1), the transferee of such property
has to return it to the concerned owner.
If a person finds any lost or stolen property of another
person, the owner of such property may make a claim, accompanied
by the evidence of his/her ownership in that property, within three
years after the date when the property was so lost or stolen.
If any person claims such property pursuant to subsection (4), such property shall have to be returned to the owner by
collecting the expenses, if any, incurred in the protection and
maintenance of such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
a person has acquired any stolen or lost property by way of purchase
at a public market or auction or Dutch auction made publicly by any
person or body, the person shall not be bound to return such property
to the real owner unless and until he/she obtains the real value of such
property and the fees or amount, if any, paid by him/her in the
acquisition of such property.
449. Prohibition on transfer of property in duplication: (1) No
person
shall re-transfer a property to another person which he/she has already
transferred to some other person.
In the event of transfer of a property by a person in
contravention of such-section (1), the deed of transfer executed at a
later date shall not be valid where an immovable property has been
transferred, and the earlier acquisition of property shall be valid where
a movable property has been transferred.
450. Entitlement to amount or compensation in event of deprivation of
enjoyment of property: (1)
If a person sells and transfers a
property pursuant to this Chapter and the purchaser is deprived of
enjoying the property wholly or partly because of such transfer being
invalid for any reason, the purchaser shall be entitled to recover the
amount paid by him/her for the property that he/she is so deprived of
enjoying, an interest to be set by yearly ten percent of the amount and
the registration fees or other amounts, if any, he/she has paid for the
transfer of that property as if it were an unsecured bond (Kapali).
If any person makes any structure in a property
purchased pursuant to this Chapter and is not able to enjoy that
property because of such transfer being invalid for any reason, that
person shall be entitled to demolish and take away the structure made
by him/her.
If any person is aggrieved in consequence of the transfer
of a property in contravention of Sections 446, 448 and 449 or failure
to demolish and take away any structure pursuant to sub-section (2),
such person shall also be entitled to a reasonable compensation of
actual loss from such transferor, in addition to the amount referred to
in sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3), the purchaser of property shall not be entitled to recover
the amount as set forth in those sub-sections in the following
circumstance:
If he/she has purchased the property despite the
knowledge that it was other’s property or a theft property,
If he/she has purchased the property despite the
knowledge that it was already transferred to any one else.
451. Person competent to transfer property: Any person except an
incompetent and quasi-competent person may, subject to this Chapter,
transfer a property in which he/she has right and ownership to another
person.
452. Right of guardian to transfer property: (1) A person may, subject
to this Chapter, transfer a property of an incompetent or quasicompetent person who is under his/her guardianship, for the right and
interest of that incompetent or quasi-competent person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
guardian shall not purchase in the name of him/her or of his/her
relative any immovable property of an incompetent or quasicompetent person who is under his/her guardianship, except with the
order of court.
453. Power of attorney to transfer right in property: (1) If a person
appoints another person who is competent to be an attorney in
accordance with law as his/her authorized attorney indicating the
reason that he/she is not able to appear personally in the concerned
office in order to sell and transfer his/her immovable property, such an
authorized attorney may, on behalf of the donor of power of attorney,
sell and transfer the property of the donor to another person.
A person may sell his/her movable property through
his/her attorney or agent.
454. Procedures to be followed while purchasing and transferring
property by a body corporate: (1) If, in transferring an immovable
property held in the name of a body corporate established in
accordance with law, the board of directors of the body corporate
gives power by a decision to any member of the board of directors or
an employee of the body corporate to transfer the property, such a
person may transfer the property on behalf of the body corporate.
If the procedures referred to in sub-section (1) are
fulfilled while purchasing an immovable property in the name of any
body corporate, such person may purchase the property in the name of
the body corporate.
455. Purchase of property by other person in one’s behalf: (1) If, except
the circumstance set forth in Section 454, the purchaser of a property
in accordance with this Chapter is, for any reason, unable to appear
personally in the concerned office and gives a power of attorney,
accompanied by his/her citizenship certificate, to a person who is
competent to be an attorney by law in relation to the purchase of the
property, such attorney may purchase the property in the name of that
person.
456. Power to purchase property in the name of incompetent or quasicompetent person: A guardian may purchase any property in the
name of the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his/her
guardianship.
457. Procedures to be fulfilled in the event of transfer of right in
property in testament: (1) If a person transfers his/her title in a
property to another person with testamentary effect and such
transferor of property dies, one who acquires the property shall have
to make an application to the concerned office for the transmission of
the property to him/her, within six months after the date of the
transferor’s death.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office shall examine the deed maintained in it and make
necessary inquiry as to whether the deed executor has died or not and
the deed is void or not.
If, upon an inquiry made pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the transferor of property has died and has not got the
deed voided, such property has to be transmitted to the applicant.
If any person makes an application to the office for the
transmission after the expiration of the time limit as referred to in subsection (1), the office shall transmit the property to the applicant in
accordance with such a deed, by collecting the fees by five hundred
rupees for each year after the expiration of the time limit.
458. Not to claim for damage, destroy or low quality: A person who has
once purchased a property from another person shall not be entitled to
make a claim that such property is damaged, destroyed or low quality.
Provided that where the seller has sold the property by
misrepresentation or with deviation for the particulars set forth in the
deed, the purchaser shall be entitled to compensation for the same.
459. Exchange of immovable property: A person may exchange his/her
property with that of other person with or without adding any amount.
460. Restriction on transfer or mortgage of immovable property to
foreigner: (1) No person shall, without obtaining prior approval of
the Government of Nepal, transfer or mortgage any immovable
property to a foreigner.
If any person transfers or mortgages any immovable
property to a foreigner in contravention of sub-section (1), the
relevant deed shall, ipso facto, be void, and such a property shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal.
The amount invested by the creditor in the acquisition of
transfer or mortgage of the immovable property pursuant to subsection (1) shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond/money.
461. Transfer in the case of acquisition by foreigner of partition share
or inheritance: (1) If any foreigner obtains partition share or
inheritance in any immovable property within Nepal, the property
shall not be eligible to be transferred to or registered in the name of
him/her nor shall he/she be entitled to enjoy the income of that
property, except where so permitted by the Government of Nepal.
If any foreigner obtains any partition share or inheritance
pursuant to sub-section (1), such a foreigner shall have to transfer
such property to a citizen of Nepal in any manner.
In the event of failure to transfer the property of partition
share or inheritance obtained by a foreigner pursuant to sub-section
(1) to a citizen of Nepal pursuant to sub-section (2) within three years
of the acquisition of such partition or inheritance, the Government of
Nepal shall have right in such property after the expiration of that time
limit.
462. Deed to be executed: In transferring or exchanging an immovable
property pursuant to this Chapter, a deed shall have to be executed to
that effect.
463. Limitation: Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable, and in the other
cases, a person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months from the
date of knowledge of the commission of such an act.

Chapter-12
Provisions Concerning Mortgage of Immovable Property
464. Mortgage deemed to be created: (1) If a debtor gives the whole or
any portion of an immovable property in which the debtor has title,
ownership or possession to a creditor in consideration of a loan which
the debtor borrows from the creditor, by executing a deed entitling the
creditor to possess that property with effect from the date of execution
of the deed or after a certain period, such property shall be deemed to
be given in mortgage.
Where the deed provides that the creditor shall be entitled
to possess the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1) with
immediate effect at the time of lending or after a certain period, such a
mortgage shall be deemed to be usufructuary mortgage, and where the
deed provides that the creditor shall be entitled to possess the property
in the event of the debtor’s default to make repayment of the loan
within the deadline set by the creditor and the debtor for repayment,
such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a mortgage without possession.
A property to be mortgaged has to be of such nature as
may be capable of being enjoyed by the mortgagee.
A person shall not mortgage a property in which he/she
has not title, ownership or possession or which he/she will acquire in
the future.
465. Deed to be executed: (1) A deed has to be executed in accordance
with law for mortgaging any property pursuant to this Chapter.
A person executing the deed of mortgage has to be
competent in accordance with law.
466. Mortgaged property to be possessed and enjoyed: (1) The creditor
has to possess and enjoy the property in usufructuary mortgage from
the date of execution of the deed thereon or from a particular date, if
any, specified in the deed and the property in sight mortgage within
two years of the expiration of the date of repayment by the debtor.
If, for any reason, the creditor is not able to possess and
enjoy such property within the period referred to in sub-section (1) or
if the debtor does not allow, by any means, the creditor to possess and
enjoy it, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance with law for
an order enabling the possession and enjoyment of such property.
If the creditor fails to possess and enjoy the property
pursuant to sub-section (1) or to make a lawsuit for the possession and
enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2), such mortgage shall ipso facto
be inoperative.
In the event that the deed of mortgage is inoperative
pursuant to sub-section (3), the deed shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond.
467. Possessory right in mortgaged property to be deemed as
transferred: If any person mortgages any property, the possessory
right in the property shall be deemed to have been transferred to the
creditor from the date of its possession and enjoyment by the creditor.
468. Entitlement to possess as if it belonged to oneself: (1) The creditor
shall be entitled to possess and enjoy the property mortgaged to
him/her and fruit, benefit and facility brought out from such property
as if the same were his/her own property.
If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
property mortgaged to him/her in consequence of that property being
incapable of transfer or of any hindrance by the debtor, the debtor has
to pay a reasonable compensation to the creditor for the same.
469. Duty to take reasonable care of mortgaged property: (1) After
acquiring possessory right in the mortgaged property, the creditor
shall have to take a reasonable care and protection of that property as
if it were his/her own.
The creditor has to pay the tax or charge, if any, payable
by law for the possession and enjoyment of the mortgaged property.
Provided that the debtor has to pay the land revenue payable by
If the creditor is not allowed to possess and enjoy the
mortgaged property as a result of any obstruction by any person other
than the debtor, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance with
470. Prohibition
collecting
interest,
charge
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, no
creditor who has lent money against the security of usufructuray
mortgage in a property shall collect any kind of interest, charge or fee
in consideration of such loan from the debtor.
After the creditor acquires possession in the property of
mortgage without possession, the creditor shall collect any kind of
interest, charge or fee in consideration of such loan.
471. Period for possession and enjoyment of property in usufructuary
mortgage: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the mortgage deed,
no property in usufructurary mortgage shall be possessed and enjoyed
for a period exceeding ten years.
If the property in usufructurary mortgage is not taken
back within the period as referred to in sub-section (1), the deed of
mortgage shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond (kapali).
472. Maximum term of mortgage without possession: (1) No term of a
mortgage without possession in a property shall exceed five years.
No creditor shall be entitled to take action to have
possession in the property in mortgage without possession or to have
recovery of the related loan from the debtor prior to the completion of
the period referred to in sub-section (1).
After the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
(1), the property may be possessed for a period not exceeding ten
years.
If the property given in usufructuary mortgage is not
redeemed within the period of ten years after the possession pursuant
to sub-section (3), the relevant deed shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond (kapali).
473. Redemption of mortgaged property at any time: (1)
Except
otherwise provided for in the mortgage deed, the debtor shall be
entitled to redeem his/her property at any time from the creditor by
repaying the loan, in the case of a property given in usufructuray
mortgage, and the interest, if any, payable on the loan, in the case of a
property given in mortgage without possession, to the creditor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the property in mortgage is a cultivable land and the creditor has
already planted crops in such land at the time of redemption, the
creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy such crops except as
otherwise agreed upon between the creditor and the debtor.
474. Remortgaging a property in mortgage: (1) A person who has
acquired a property in mortgage shall be entitled to remortgage such
property or any part thereof to another person in consideration for an
amount which is equivalent to, or lesser than, the amount mentioned
in the mortgage deed, and in such a case, a re-mortgage is deemed to
be created.
Provided that a mortgaged property shall not be the subject of
remortgage prior to the existence of the possessory right in such
property.
The term of possession and enjoyment of the remortgage
given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the term of
possession and enjoyment under the mortgage.
If the debtor who has right and ownership in the property
intends to redeem the property remortgaged pursuant to sub-section
(1), the debtor shall be entitled to redeem the property upon payment
of the price/loan directly from the re-mortgagee if the price of the
remortgage is equivalent to the original price and through the
mortgage such price is less than the original one.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the transaction of remortgage made inconsistent with the
terms of the mortgage shall ipso facto be void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
If the creditor is not entitled to possess the property remortgaged pursuant to this Chapter, the deed of such remortgage shall
be equivalent to an unsecured bond (kapali).
475. Mortgaging benefits of property in mortgage: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 474, a creditor who has acquired a
property in mortgage may, instead of remortgaging the whole property,
remortgage only the fruits, benefit or facility of such property or any
crops, products, trees, bamboo trees, reaped or to be reaped fruits,
vegetables or any other kinds of products to be yielded or exploited
from such land.
476. Mortgaging by third party on behalf of debtor: (1) A third party
may, in consideration for a loan borrowed by debtor, mortgage a
property in which the third party has title, ownership or possession to
the creditor on behalf of the debtor.
The creditor shall, pursuant to this Chapter, be entitled to
possess and enjoy the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1)
as if it were the property mortgaged by the debtor to the creditor.
In the event that a property is mortgaged by a third party
pursuant to sub-section (1), the relationship between the debtor and
the third party shall be governed by the mortgage deed or other
separate contract, and failing such provision, it shall be equivalent to
an unsecured bond (kapali).
477. Property in mortgage to be indivisible: (1) A property mortgaged
by a debtor to a creditor shall remain indivisible notwithstanding the
creation of more than one creditor in virtue of the partition or
succession between the creditor’s coparceners or the division between
creditor’s partners, and the debtor shall not be entitled to redeem the
whole or any party of the mortgaged property until the loan borrowed
by the debtor is repaid in full in accordance with the mortgage deed.
If two or more debtors are created in virtue of the
partition, succession between the debtor’s coparceners or the division
between the debtor’s partners, the mortgaged property is not
redeemable until each debtor repays his/her respective portion of the
loan in full.
478. Liability of a creditor for loss and damage of property in
mortgage: (1) After the creation of the creditor’s possessory right in
the property in mortgage, the creditor shall be liable for any kind of
loss or damage, if any, caused to the property in mortgage.
In the event of any loss or damage to the property
in mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1), the creditor shall so maintain
such property, at his/her cost, as to restore it into its original form.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the creditor shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused to the
property in mortgage by a natural calamity, and the creditor has to
maintain such loss or damage with the consent of the debtor.
While redeeming the property in mortgage, the debtor
has also to pay the expenses incurred in the maintenance pursuant to
sub-section (3), in addition to the loan borrowed from the creditor.
479. Not to create trouble on property in mortgage: After the creation
of the possessory right in the property in mortgage, the creditor shall
not so trouble the debtor by saying that such property is inappropriate
or is more or less as to be inconsistent with the terms of the deed.
Provided that nothing shall bar the making of a claim for the
repayment of loan in accordance with the mortgage deed if the
creditor is not allowed to possess the property in mortgage for any
reason or if the property is held to be imperfect for any reason
whatsoever.
480. Prohibition on mortgage in duplication: (1) No property which has
already been mortgaged shall be mortgaged, in duplication, again to
other person.
If a person mortgages a property in duplication in
contravention of sub-section (1), the second deed shall ipso facto be
void.
In the case a deed becomes void pursuant to sub-section
(2), the amount of a creditor who knowingly executes a deed in
duplication shall lapse, and that of a creditor who executes it without
knowledge of duplication shall be equivalent to unsecured bond
(kapali).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, and the first deed
providing for any kind of mortgage and the second deed providing for
the transfer of title, the transferee shall be entitled to establish the title
by making repayment of loan in accordance with the first deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, title is to
be established within a period of two years from the date of the first
deed providing for usufructuary mortgage and within the period of
two years from the date of entitlement to the possessory right if the
first deed provides for mortgage without possessory right.
In the event of failure to establish the title pursuant to
sub-section (5) the amount of the creditor shall be equivalent to
unsecured bond (kapali).
481. Limitation: Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable, and in the other
cases, a person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of one year after the date
of the commission of such act.

Chapter-13
Provisions Concerning Pre-emption of Immovable Property:
482. Pre-emption deemed to be made: Where a person transfers, in any
manner, an immovable property in which that person has title,
possession and ownership to another person and any one who is in
neighbor of such property redeems it in accordance with this Chapter,
pre-emption shall be deemed to be made.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “in
neighbor of” means a situation where one is dependent for ditch,
water supply, passage or exit on other’s house or land bordering one’s
house or land.
483. Entitlement of heir to pre-emption: (1) If a person sells his/her
immovable property, the heir in neighbor of such land shall be entitled
to pre-empt such property upon payment of the amount paid by the
buyer of that property as well as the fees incurred in the passage of
deed to the buyer.
If there are two or more heirs who intend to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1), then the nearest heir, and, where
such heirs are two or more, the heir in immediate neighbor, and,
where even such heirs are two or more, all heirs in equal proportion
shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
If the nearest heir does not pre-empt such property
pursuant to sub-section (2), the heir who is the nearest in order of
priority shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
484. Pre-emption by tenant: If there is no heir in neighbor of or even if
there is an heir, but he/she does not intend to make pre-emption
pursuant to Section 483, the tenant, if any, in such property in
accordance with law shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
485. Pre-emption of sold house: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in Section 483, where there are different owners of the
different parts of same house and the owner of a part sells his/her part
to another person, the owner of another part may, if he/she intends to
pre-empt that part, preempt the house by paying the house on payment
of the amount paid by the buyer and the fees incurred in the
registration of the deed to the buyer. If the owner of such other part is
the heir, he/she shall get the first priority.
486. Pre-emption of house donated or gifted: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Sections 483, 484 or 485, if any person
relinquishes in any manner his/her title and donates or gifts the half
part of the same house or any portion thereof or a land occupied by or
appurtenant to the house and the donee has transferred the right in the
house or land in any manner to another person, the donor or his/her
heir residing in the same place may, if he/she so intends, pre-empt
such house or any portion thereof or the land occupied by or
appurtenant to the house upon payment of the amount of the price, if
any, set out.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in subsection (1), if a person gets a donation or gift of the half part or any
portion of the same house or the land accompanied by or appurtenant
to the house from another person and the Section and the donor or
gifter of such house or land donates or gifts the remaining part or
portion of that house or land to another person, the former donee or
giftee or his/her heir may preempt the remaining part or portion.
In making preemption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
the figure of price, if any, indicated in the donation or gift, and
amount equivalent to the prevailing market price, if such figure is not
so indicated, and the fees incurred in the registration of the deed have
to be paid to the creditor.
If, there are two or more heirs intending to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the nearest heir, and the
most aggrieved heir, where even the nearest heirs are two or more,
shall be entitled to make pre-emption.
487. Pre-emption not to be allowed: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Sections 485 and 486, a house built under the
provision of joint housing or any part of such house shall not be
subject to pre-emption.
488. Payment of money by pre-emptor: (1) A person who makes preemption pursuant to this Chapter shall make a petition in the office
making registration of the relevant deed, and such petition has to be
accompanied by the price of the property to be pre-empted, if any,
indicated in the deed registered for the transfer of such property and
the fees charged in the registration of such deed.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
office making registration of deed shall hold the petitioner on
recognizance and summon the person obliged to allow preemption to
appear in the office, within seven days excluding the time required for
journey.
If the person obliged to allow preemption appears and
consents to preemption within the time limit as referred to in subsection (1), the office making registration deed shall effect preemption
by paying the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1).
If, despite that the person obliged to allow preemption
does not appear and consent to preemption within the time limit as
referred to in sub-section (1), it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office making registration of deed shall make decision to
effect pre-emption, and if it appears that pre-emption is not be made,
that office shall make decision not to effect pre-emption and give
information thereof to the petitioner.
If the person obliged to allow preemption does not appear
within the time limit as referred to in sub-section (1), and, after the
expiration of the time limit, if it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office shall make decision to effect pre-emption and give
an execution slip to the person entitled to pre-emption to enjoy the
property to be pre-empted, and send a notice to the person obliged to
allow preemption to receive the amount of deposit made pursuant to
sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
the person obliged to allow preemption appears within the time limit
and shows the reason why pre-emption is not to be made, and it is
necessary to decide upon examination of evidence, the office shall
inform that the concerned person should make a lawsuit in the court
within thirty five days.
In returning the amount to the petitioner on holding that
pre-emption cannot be made pursuant to sub-section (4), two and half
percent of the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1) has to be
deducted.
If the person who has petitioned for pre-emption does not
intend subsequently to make pre-emption or fails to appear on the
appointed dates, the office shall punish that person with a fine of three
percent of the amount of deposit furnished by him/her and the amount
that remains after deducting that fine from the amount of deposit shall
be returned to him/her.
489. To update records upon pre-emption: If it is held by the concerned
office or court that pre-emption can be made, entries have to be made
and updated accordingly in the records of the pre-empted property
maintained in such office.
490. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of thirty five days of
the date of knowledge within six months of the date of the registration
of deed.
Provided that a tenant may file a complaint within a period of
thirty five days after the date of expiration of the date within which
the landowner may make pre-emption.

Chapter-14
Provisions Concerning Registration of Deeds
491. Deed deemed to be registered: If any deed submitted by an person to
the concerned office for approval pursuant to this Chapter is approved
by such office, such deed shall be deemed to be approved for
registration.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“concerned office” means such an office as may be designated by the
Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
492. Deeds to be registered: (1) In making any of the following deeds, a
person has to get it approved for registration with the concerned
office:
A deed transferring the right in an immovable property in
any manner,
A deed on mortgage with usufructuray possession,
mortgage without usufructuray possession or re-mortgage,
A deed on donation or gift of immovable property in
testament,
A deed on exchange of immovable property,
A deed on partition or relinquishment of partition on
common property,
A deed on separation of board and bread or unification of
board and bread,
A deed on creation of a trust,
A deed on house renting with a monthly rent of more
than one hundred thousand rupees,
A deed on usufruct in an immovable property,
Such other deed required to be registered pursuant to this
Code or law.
If a person fails to have registered a deed which is
required to be registered pursuant to sub-section (1), such deed shall
not have legal recognition.
493. Voluntary registration of other deeds: (1) A person may, if he/she
so intends, have registered any deed other than that set forth in

Section 492.
If any person makes an application for the registration of
a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned office shall register
such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.
494. Registration of deed by a mission: (1)
If a person makes an
application to the concerned office for the registration of a deed by a
mission deputed by the office and it appears that such a deed can be
registered by that office, the chief of office or other employee deputed
by him/her shall, on deposit with the office of the fees chargeable for
such registration, visit the location referred by the applicant and
approve and register such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.
If the deed is registered by a mission deputed pursuant to
sub-section (1), the office shall credit into revenue the deposit made
pursuant to that sub-section.
If, for any reason, the deed is not registered by a mission
deputed pursuant to sub-section (1), the applicant has to get refund of
the deposit within three months.
If the applicant fails to get refund of the deposit within
the time limit referred to in sub-section (3), the office shall credit such
deposit into revenue.
495. Registration of deeds from other districts: (1) If the parties to a
deed intend to get the deed registered in a district other than the
district in which they reside or the property is located, they have to
make an application, setting out the matter, to the concerned office of
that district.
If an application is made for the registration of a deed
pursuant to sub-section (1), such an office has to make necessary
inquiry into the matter and approve and register such deed by
fulfilling the legal requirements.
If a deed of immovable property is registered in another
district pursuant to sub-section (1), the office has to send a copy of the
registered deed to the relevant office of the concerned district.
496. Fees chargeable for registration of deeds: (1) Fees as specified by
law shall be charged for the registration of a deed.
Except where the law provides for the fees of registration
of a deed, fees shall be charged according to the amount set forth in
the deed dealing with transaction of money.
Provided that if the price of the immovable property
referred to in the deed is less than the minimum price specified by the
Government of Nepal, the fees shall be charged according to the price
specified by the Government of Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
in registering a deed in another district, there shall be charged
an additional fee by ten percent of the fees set forth in that sub-section.
497. Obligation to pay fees: The following person has to pay the
following fees chargeable for the registration of a deed:
In the case of a deed transferring a property or relating to
mortgage, the transferee or mortgagee,
In the case of a deed on partition or relinquishment of
partition share, separation of board and bread or
unification of board and bread, all co-parceners in equal
portion,
In the case of a deed on exchange of property, both
parties to the deed,
In the case of a deed on donation or gift in testament, the
donor,
In the case of a deed on house renting, the giver,
In the case of any other deed, both parties to the deed.
498. Provisions concerning payment of amount: If any amount is to be
paid and received by and to the parties to a deed according to the deed
intended to be registered, such payment may be effected either in
household or in presence of the concerned employee of the office or
by a good for payment cheque.
499. Transfer and transmission to be effected: (1) If any transfer and
transmission is to be effected in consequence of a deed registered, the
concerned office has to execute the transfer and transmission within
seven days of the date of registration of the deed.
If any transfer and transmission is to be made in the
records of another office according to the deed registered by one
office, the latter shall give a time limit of thirty five days to the
transferee, thereby informing him/her to go to the concerned office for
the transfer and transmission and also send the deed to the concerned
office.
On receipt of a deed sent by another district for the
transfer and transmission pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
office has to enter the matter into its records and effect transfer and
transmission according to the deed.
500. Deed registered on earlier date to be valid: In the event of
registration of more than one deed in relation to the same matter, the
deed registered on the earlier date shall be valid.
501. Limitation: (1) A person who is aggrieved from any act done
pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six
months from the date of commission of such an act.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a deed is registered by an office of another area, a complaint
may be made within a period of six months from the date of receipt by
the concerned office of a copy of the registered deed.

Chapter-15
Provisions Concerning Transaction
502. Transaction deemed to be made: (1) If there is an exchange of any
amount or goods between two or more persons subject to any
condition, transaction shall be deemed to have been made between
them.
In the event of a transaction made pursuant to sub-section
(1), the receiver of amount or goods shall have to return the same to
the giver of amount or goods.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“amount” includes the price of goods.
503. Equivalent to loan: If a person has a liability to give any amount or
goods to another person in any manner, such a liability shall be
equivalent to a loan borrowed by that person, and such a person shall
have to return such an amount or goods to the concerned person,
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
504. Prohibition on transaction without a deed: No one shall carry on
transaction without executing a deed in accordance with law.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term “deed”
includes a document including a cheque, bill, voucher and receipt
evidencing a transaction.
505. Matters to be set out in a deed: In carrying on a transaction, the
following matters have to be set out according to the nature of
transaction:
Name, surname, age, address of each person involved in
transaction, and name of his/her father, mother, grandfather and grand-mother,
Provided that in the case of a married person, the
name of his/her husband or wife, as the case may be, has
also to be mentioned.
Reason for transaction,
Volume of transaction,
In the case of transaction of any goods, price of the goods,
In the case of exchange of any goods by way of
borrowing, loan or otherwise, the matter to that effect,
Details of the goods, if any, exchanged,
Date of repayment of money transacted,
Rate of interest, if any, payable on the transaction,
Matter that the creditor shall be entitled to recover the
amount involved in the transaction from the assets of the
borrower in the event of failure to repay such amount
within the specified time or to fulfill the other conditions
set forth in the deed,
Place where the deed is executed,
Date when the deed is executed,
Such other matters as required to be set out by the nature
of transaction.
506. Entitlement of creditor to interest from debtor: (1) If a deed on
transaction provides about the payment of interest, the creditor shall
be entitled to collect the interest from the debtor as set forth in the
deed.
The amount of interest which the creditor is entitled to
collect from the debtor pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed
annual ten percent of the principal.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) does not
provide for the rate of interest but only provides for the payment of
interest, the creditor shall be entitled to collect interest from the debtor
at the rate of annual ten percent of the principal.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) provides
for the payment of profit instead of interest but does not specify the
amount of such profit, the creditor shall be entitled to collect such
profit from the debtor as if it were interest.
507. Prohibition on collection of interest by creditor from debtor: If the
deed on transaction does not provide for the payment of interest, the
creditor shall not be entitled to collect interest from the debtor.
508. Prohibition on collection of compound interest: (1) The creditor
shall not be entitled to collect compound interest.
If any creditor collects compound interest from a debtor
in contravention of sub-section (1), such an interest shall be deducted
from the principal and shall be refunded if the principal has already
been repaid.
509. Prohibition on collection of interest in excess of principal:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
creditor shall not be entitled to charge interest in excess of the
principal.
510. Procedures to be followed in paying and charging principal and
interest: The following procedures shall be fulfilled in paying and
charging interest:
If the debtor repays the whole of the principal and interest, the
creditor has to sign and return the deed on transaction to the
debtor by tearing out the deed or indicating on its reverse side
that the loan has been repaid,
If the deed is not found at the time of repayment of the principal and
interest pursuant to clause (a), the creditor shall have to give the
debtor a receipt indicating the receipt of the particular amount
on the particular date,
In repaying some amount out of the principal and interest, the creditor
shall have to indicate on the reverse side of the deed how much
he/she has received from the debtor on which date, and get the
debtor to sign the deed and issue a separate receipt of amount
accordingly if the deed is not found immediately or it is not
with the creditor for the time being.
511. Interest accruable as of the recovery of amount: If the court passes
a judgment entitling the creditor to recover interest as well, the
creditor shall be entitle to the interest as of the date of recovery
according to the judgment.
512. Period of a deed executed on household: (1) The period of a deed
executed on household pursuant to this Chapter shall not exceed ten
years except as otherwise provided in the deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the debtor repays some of the principal or interest thereon to the
creditor or the term of a deed is extended for the repayment of
principal or interest within the period of ten years, the period of
another ten years shall be extended from the date of such repayment
of principal or interest or extension of the period, as the case may be.
513. Transaction carried on with incompetent or quasi-competent
person not to be recognized: A transaction carried on with an
incompetent or quasi-competent person shall not have legal
recognition.
514. Recovery not available from property in common: (1) If any
person carries on transaction with another person and the deed of such
transaction does not bear the signature of the head of family, the
creditor shall not be entitled to recover his/her amount from such
property until the debtor's right in the property in common is
established.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the head of family repays the amount, the creditor shall be entitled to
recover the same.
If any person is not able to recover the amount from the
debtor on the occurrence of the circumstance referred to in sub-section
(1), the creditor shall have to make a complaint against the debtor and
maintain his/her right within a period of ten years.
In the event of the maintenance of the right with the
debtor pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall be entitled to
recover his/her amount from the debtor pursuant to law after his/her
right in the property in common has been established.
The limitation for filling a complaint shall, for the
recovery of the amount pursuant to sub-section (4), commence from
the date of establishment of the debtor's right.
515. Exchange of movable property not allowed without consent: (1) A
major member in a common family is not entitled to exchange any
movable property in common without consent of the head of family.
Provided that the consent of the head of family shall not be
required to exchange one’s personal property.
If a person exchanges a movable property in
contravention of sub-section (1), the exchange of such property shall
not be valid if the head of family does not consent to such exchange.
If there is no consent of the head of family to the
exchange of movable property made in contravention of sub-section
(1), the property so exchanged can be taken within a period of thirty
five days.
516. Recovery of amount if transaction appears: Even though any
person does not execute a deed by fulfilling the procedures referred to
in this Chapter, if it appears from any deed, banking transaction,
cheque, voucher or book of account that transaction has been carried
on with any person, the court may, based on such a deed, banking
transaction, cheque, voucher or book of account, order the recovery of
such amount from the debtor to the complainant.
517. Procedures to be followed where a deed executed on household is
lost or destroyed due to natural calamities: (1) If a deed executed
on household is lost or destroyed due to natural calamities, the
creditor shall have to make an application, setting out the matter, to
the local body within a period of fifteen days from the date on which
such loss or natural calamities are occured.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
local body shall have to draw up a receipt setting out the matter and
issue a receipt, sealed with the stamp of the office, to the applicant.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
local body shall have to summon the presence of the deed executor, if
he/she is alive, and of the nearest heir, if such executor is not alive,
within a period seven days, and cause a deed to be prepared as per the
original deed, if he/she so consents, and authenticate such a deed and
deliver it to the applicant.
If the deed executor does not consent to execute another
deed indicating that the deed has been lost or destroyed due to natural
calamities pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall have to make
a complaint and maintain his/her right, showing the evidence of the
loss of a deed or destruction due to natural calamities within a period
of thirty five days of the expiry of that time limit.
518. To return Goods transacted in the event of imperfection: (1)
Except as otherwise provided for in the deed, if the receiver of
any goods transacted with specification of price is not able to possess
the goods due to the fact that the goods do not correspond to that set
forth in the deed or are imperfect, he/she shall have to give a notice
thereof to the giver of goods within a period of thirty five days of such
transaction.
If a notice is received from the receiver of goods
pursuant to sub-section (1) and his/her statement appears to be
reasonable, the exchange of goods shall have to be made if the giver
has similar other goods; and if the giver does not have such goods,
he/she shall have to get back his/her goods and cancel the deed
executed in relation to such transaction.
If the giver of goods refuses to exchange or to take back
the goods pursuant to sub-section (2), the receiver of goods shall be
entitled to make a complaint to have recover of an amount equivalent
to the price of such goods and a reasonable compensation from the
concerned person or get such transaction to be void.
519. To return goods in original condition: (1) If any person acquires or
borrows for any specific purpose any goods owned by another person
whether for rent or not or on any other terms and conditions, the
person shall, after the completion of the purpose, have to return the
goods that are the same in kind, quantity and quality as have been so
acquired or borrowed.
If the goods acquired or borrowed pursuant to subsection (1) are lost, broken, destroyed, out of order or otherwise
damaged, except as otherwise provided for in the deed, the person
who acquires or borrowers of the goods shall have to return similar
other goods to the owner or pay to the owner an amount equivalent to
the prevailing market price of such goods if similar other goods are
not available.
Except as otherwise provided in the deed in relation to
the return of goods or payment of rent for the same pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), such goods or rent have to be returned or paid to the
owner within a period of fifteen days after the completion of the
purpose for which the goods have been acquired or borrowed.
If the person who acquires or borrower the goods fails to
return or pay the goods or amount to the owner within the time limit
set forth in sub-section (3), the aggrieved person may make a
complaint for the recovery of the amount of such goods and a
reasonable compensation for the loss caused to him/her.
520. Limitation: (1) There shall be no limitation for filling a complaint in
the matter of transaction carried on with intent to misappropriate or
prejudice the wealth of an incompetent and quasi-competent person,
collection of interest on interest or provision of interest in excess of
ten percent.
Except as provided for in sub-section (1), a person who is
aggrieved by any act done in accordance with this Chapter may file a
complaint as follows from the date of commission of such an act:
Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable,
Within a period of one year from the date of expiration of
the period, if any, specified in any deed, and failing such
a deed, or in the other cases, within a period of one year
from the occurrence of the cause of action.

Part 5
LAW CONCERNING
CONTRACT
OTHER OBLIGASIONS

Chapter-1
General Provisions Concerning Obligations
521. Obligation to Arise: (1) In case there is a compulsion in law to
carry out or forbear to carry out any act, an obligation arises if
one does not carry out or does carry out such act.
(2) The obligation to be created pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall
arise and be maintained and determined under this Chapter.
522. Circumstances on which obligation is created: (1) The
obligation referred to in Section 1 shall be created and
maintained as follows:-
(a) By a law;
(b) By a contract;
(c) By an indirect contract or a quasi-contract;
(d) By an unjust enrichment;
(e) By a unilateral commitment of any person to assume an
obligation;
(f) By an act to be treated as tort under law;
(g) By an act to be treated as a quasi-tort under law.
(2) In regard to sub-Section (1),-
a) The obligation referred to in clause (a) shall be created
under this Code or other laws.
b) The obligation referred to in clause (b) shall be created
under a contact entered into between the parties.
c) The obligation referred to in clause (c) shall be created
under an indirect or a quasi-contact as defined in Chapter
15 of this Part.
d) The obligation referred to in clause (d) shall be created
under an unjust enrichment as defined in Chapter 16 of
this Part.
e) The obligation referred to in clause (e) shall be determined
under provision for creating an obligation under the law
through a unilateral commitment.
f) The obligation referred to in clause (f) shall be created
under the tort as defined in Chapter 17 of this Part.
g) The obligation referred to in clause (g) shall be created
from the defective product as defined in Chapter 18 of this
Part or from other act to be deemed as quasi-tort according
to law.
523. Obligation to be fulfilled: (1) While fulfilling an obligation,
the obligation of a matter which has been created or maintained
as to be fulfilled by a person or the person who has undertaken
to fulfill an obligation, such a person shall have to fulfill the
obligation of such a matter.
(2) In case the person who has to fulfill an obligation pursuant
to sub-Section(1) dies or becomes an insane, the successor who
succeeds his/her property shall have to fulfill such an obligation.
524. Obligation to be fulfilled within the prescribed time: (1) If a
fixed duration has been specified for fulfilling any obligation,
the obligation shall be fulfilled within the same duration.
(2) If a particular day or duration has been specified for
fulfilling any obligation, the obligation shall be fulfilled on the
same day or within the same duration.
Provided that if there is a stipulation that the obligation shall be
fulfilled within certain day or duration, the obligation may be
fulfilled even prior to such day or duration as well.
(3) In case no day or duration has been specified as referred to
in sub-Section (1) or (2), the duration, day or time to fulfill the
obligation shall be determined on the basis of nature of the
obligation and the obligation shall be fulfilled within a
reasonable time.
(4) In case no obligation is fulfilled pursuant to sub-Section (1),
(2) or (3), it shall be deemed that the person who has required
fulfilling the obligation has not fulfilled or could not be fulfilled.
525. Each of obligators has to fulfill obligation: (1) In case more
than one person have undertaken to fulfill an obligation or such
obligation has been created in his case, unless provided
otherwise, each of them has to fulfill the obligation equally.
(2) In case of a stipulation that a person has to fulfill an
obligation towards more than one person, unless provided
otherwise, the obligation towards each of them has to be
fulfilled equally.
526. Obligation may be divisible: (1) In cases where an obligation
has to be fulfilled towards more than one persons or more than
one persons have to fulfill an obligation, if the obligation
towards such persons or to be fulfilled by such persons could be
divided or fragmented having regard to its nature, such an
obligation may be divided and every person shall have to fulfill
the obligation or the obligation towards every person shall be
fulfilled accordingly.
(2) In the cases referred to in sub-Section (1), each person or
all persons may require to get the obligation fulfilled from each
or all persons requiring to fulfill such an obligation.
527. Obligation to be fulfilled in good faith: The obligation created
pursuant to Section 522 shall have to be fulfilled in good faith
by the person who has to fulfill it.
528. Compensation to be borne if no obligation has been fulfilled:
(1) In case the person required to fulfill an obligation makes
delay to fulfill obligation and thereby a loss is incurred to any
other persons in any manner whatsoever, such a person shall
have to bear compensation for the actual loss so caused.
(2) In case the person required to fulfill an obligation does not
fulfill it by fraud and a loss is incurred thereby, he/she shall be
liable to pay compensation for the loss so caused.
529 Obligation
contrary
fulfilled:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
if fulfillment of an obligation would be contrary to a law, public
order or public morality, such an obligation shall not need to be
fulfilled.
530. Impossible Obligation not to be fulfilled: (1) If, at the time of
occurrence of an obligation, the obligation of impossible nature
that could not be fulfilled has been arisen, such an obligation
shall not need to be fulfilled.
(2) If an obligation was, at the time of its occurrence, possible to
be fulfilled, however, it becomes subsequently impossible to be
fulfilled, the consequence of such obligation shall be determined
according to the law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) or
(2), if a portion of an obligation could be fulfilled and the rest
portion could be fulfilled, the obligation shall be fulfilled to the
extent it could be fulfilled.
531. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of one year from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-2
Provisions Concerning Formation of a Contract
532. Contract is deemed to be concluded: (1) In case an agreement
enforceable by law is concluded between two or more persons to
do or forbear to do any act, it shall be deemed to be a contract.
(2) For the purpose of sub-Section (1), a Contract shall be
deemed to have been concluded once the person to whom an
offer has been made by another person communicates his/her
acceptance.
(3) Once a contract is concluded, a binding legal relationship
shall be created between the parties to it.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) “Offer” means an offer made by one person to another
person with the intent of obtaining his/her acceptance
to do or forbear to do any act.
(b) “Acceptance” means the acceptance given by the
person to whom the offer has been made in the same
meaning in which the offer is made.
533. A Contract Enforceable by Law: (1) A contract concluded
having fulfilled the following conditions shall be deemed to be a
contract enforceable according to law:-
(a) The consent expressed by a person to a contract to bind
him/herself;
(b) Capacity or qualification of a party to a contract to
conclude a contract;
(c) Certain matter for creation of an obligation; and
(d) Lawful obligation.
(2) A contract may be concluded in written or verbal form or by
conduct of the parties concluding the contract.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in case
there is a requirement for conclusion of any particular contract
having completed particular procedure or formality, the contract
having not completed such procedures or formality may not be
enforceable.
534. Person Competent to Conclude a Contract: (1) Every person
other than the ones referred to herein below shall be competent for
concluding a contract:-
(a) One who has not attained the age of eighteen years,
(b) One who is of unsound mind.
Explanation:
(1) A person who is usually of unsound mind, but
occasionally of sound mind, may conclude a contract when
he is of sound mind.
(2) A person who is usually of sound mind, but
occasionally of unsound mind, may not conclude a
contract when he is of unsound mind.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), any
person not competent to enter into a particular contract under the
law in force shall not be deemed to be a competent person to
conclude such a contract.
(3) While entering into a contract on behalf of the person who is
not competent to conclude a contract, his/her guardian may
conclude a contract.
(4) While entering into a contract on behalf of a legal person, it
shall be concluded by a decision of the director or directors who
is/are authorized for management and operation of the legal
person or by authority of such a director or directors, as the case
may be.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section,
in case there is a legal provision that even a person deemed to be
incompetent for concluding a particular type of contract under
this Chapter is competent to conclude a contract on such a matter,
such a person shall be deemed to be competent to conclude a
contract on such a matter.
535. Parties to be Autonomous: Subject to this Code, the parties to a
contract shall be free to choose the form and content of contract,
to determine the terms and conditions of the contract and the
nature of the remedy as well as to determine the measures for
resolving disputes arising out under the contract.
536. Offer and Acceptance deemed to be completed: (1) Once the
offeree comes to know about an offer, the act of making the offer
shall be deemed to have been completed.
(2) The act of giving acceptance shall be deemed to have been
completed, in case of the offerer, if the offerer receives the
acceptance forwarded by the offeree to the offerer having indicated
his/her acceptance to the offer, and in case of the offeree, if the
offerer comes to know that the offeree has accepted the offer.
(3) Even though there is no expression of acceptance to the offer
directly, in case the offeree abides by any terms referred to in the
offer by way of his/her conduct or accepts the advantage or service
referred to in the offer or indicates acceptance in any other manner,
the offeree shall be deemed to have accepted the offer.
(4) In case the offerer makes an offer having stipulated certain time
duration and specifies that the offer is regarded to have been
accepted if a notice of rejection of the offer is not sent within such
duration, and if the offeree does not send a notice of acceptance of
the offer within such duration, the said offer shall not be deemed to
have been accepted.
537. Offer or Acceptance may be revoked: (1) The offerer may
cancel his/her offer through a notice.
Provided that, in case the offerer has received from the offeree a
notice to the effect that he/she has approved the offer before
receiving a notice of the revocation of the offer, the offer shall
not be deemed to be revoked.
(2) The offeree may revoke his/her acceptance through a notice.
Provided that the acceptance shall not be revoked in case the
offerer has already received the notice of acceptance before
receiving the notice of revocation of the acceptance.
(3) The person who has sent a notice expressing his/her refusal of
the offer may again send a notice expressing his/her acceptance to
the offer.
Provided that, in case the notice of refusal out of the notices of
refusal or acceptance reaches first, the contract shall not be
deemed to have been formed and in case the notice of acceptance
reaches first, the contract shall be deemed to have been concluded.
(4) In case the notice referred to in sub-Section (1) has been sent
after sending the offer, the notice referred to in sub-Section (2)
has been sent after sending a notice of acceptance, or in case a
notice has been sent under sub-Section (3) after sending a notice
of refusal and the concerned person receives such notices at the
same time, the contract shall not be deemed to have been
concluded.
(5) In case the offeree sends an acceptance with conditions or
with alteration to the offer sent by the offeror, it shall be deemed
that the offeree offers as counter offer.
538. Offer to be deemed revoked: An offer shall be deemed to have
been revoked in any of the following circumstances: -
(a) In case the offerer proposes an offer with a condition that
notice of acceptance to the offer be given within a specified
period, and the offerer does not receive a notice of acceptance
by the offeree within that period;
(b) In case the period for sending a notice of acceptance as
referred to in clause (a) is not specified and the offeree has been
made does not furnish a notice of acceptance to the offerer
within a reasonable period;
(c) In case the offerer, after presenting the offer, dies or
becomes insane before receiving the acceptance;
(d) In case the offer is revoked as referred to in Section 537;
(e) In case the acceptance was given but the offeree dies or
becomes insane before he/she receives the acceptance.
(f) In case the offeree sends a counter offer as referred to in sub Section (5) of Section 537;
(g) In case an offer make a condition that the offeree has to do
any act or fulfill any condition before accepting the offer,
acceptance is made without doing such an act or fulfilling such a
condition.
539. A contract according to offer presented before the public in
general: (1) In case a person makes an offer publicly by means
of an advertisement that he/she will reward any person for doing
any act specified in the advertisement, and in case any person
does the act as specified in the advertisement, the advertiser
shall have to reward such a person as stated in the advertisement.
Provided that in case the person does such an act referred to in
the advertisement without having knowledge about such
advertisement, such a person shall not be entitled to the reward.
(2) In case the act referred to in sub-Section (2) is done by more
than one person, only the person who does the act first shall be
entitled to the reward.
Provided that, in case two or more persons do the work referred
to in the offer at the same time, all of them shall be entitled to
the equal share of the reward and in case the reward could not be
shared, the proceeds of the sale of the same shall be equally
divided among them.
(3) In case a specific period is prescribed to do the act according
to the advertisement published under sub-Section (1), the offer
made according to the advertisement shall be deemed to have
been revoked immediately after the expiry of that period.
(4) An offer made under sub-Section (2) may be revoked
through the same medium through which it was published.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (4), in
case anyone does the act referred to in the advertisement
published under sub-Section (1) before publication of the notice
of revocation of the offer, he/she shall be entitled to the reward
as referred to in the advertisement.
Provided that, the person who does the act as referred to in the
advertisement shall have to notify the advertiser about the
completion of the act as soon as possible.
(6) In case any person begins to do the act according to the
advertisement published under sub-Section (1) having furnished
notification thereof to the advertiser, the person does the act in
such a manner shall be paid an appropriate remuneration for the
act done by him/her until the revocation of the advertisement.
540. Place of Formation of Contract: (1) The place where the
offerer sends an offer expecting to receive acceptance shall be
deemed to be the place where the contract is formed.
(2) In case the place is not specified under sub-Section (1), the
place where the offerer receives acceptance shall be deemed to
be the place where the contract is formed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Sections (1) and
(2), in case the parties specify the place of formation of the
contract in the contract itself, such a place shall be regarded as
the place of formation of the contract.
541. Contingent Contract: (1) In case a contract is concluded to do
or forbear to do any act if any event happens in the future, such
a contract shall not create any obligation until such an event
happens.
(2) In case a contract is concluded on the condition that the
contract shall be deemed to be concluded if any person does a
particular act, no obligation shall be created if such a person
does any act in such a manner as not to do or not to be able to do
any act.
(3) In case a contract is concluded on the condition to do or
forbear to do any uncertain event in the future, the obligation
under such a contract shall arise only after such an event
becomes impossible to happen.
(4) In case a contract is concluded to do or forbear to do any act
if any uncertain event does happen in the future, the contract
shall be deemed to have become void after becoming the
happening of that event impossible within the specified period or
after the expiring of the specified period.
(5) In case a contract is concluded on the condition to do or
forbear to do any act in case any event does not happen within a
specified period in the future, the obligation according to the
contract shall arise if such an event does not happen within such
a period or it is certain that such an event shall not happen
within such a period.
542. General provisions of Contract to Apply: The provisions of
this Chapter and Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Part shall, normally,
be applicable with regard to a contract or to other contracts to be
concluded according to this Code or a law.
543. Interpretation of Contract: (1) Interpretation of a contract
shall be made according to the common intention of its parties.
(2) In case the intention referred to in sub-Section (1) could not
be established, a contract shall be interpretated according to the
meaning of general understanding that a reasonable person of
the same prudence as a party to the contract would give to it in
normal circumstance.
(3) In case a party of a contract knows or is informed about a
statement or conduct of another party of the contract, the
contract shall be interpretated according to the intention of such
party.
(4) Interpretation of terms and expressions used in a contract
shall be made in the light of the entire contract or the context of
the statement in which such terms and expressions have been
used.
(5) A contract shall be interpretated so as to giving effect to all
the terms used in a contract and it shall not be interpretated
giving effect to deprive some terms from other terms.
544. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action has been occurred.

Chapter - 3
Validity of Contracts
545. Void Contract: (1) A contract which is not valid according to
law shall be deemed to be a void contract.
(2) The following contracts shall be void:-
(a) A contract that restraints anyone from exercising any
profession, trade or business which is not prohibited by a
Provided that a contract shall not be deemed to have been
concluded restraining from exercising any profession,
trade or business in any of the following circumstances:-
(1) In case a contract is concluded between the buyer
and the seller on selling and buying of the goodwill
of any trade, the contract prohibiting the seller from
carrying out a trade or business under such goodwill
at the time and place as referred to in such contract;
(2) A contract concluded among partners to restrain
their involvement in any profession, trade or
business, other than those of the partnership firm,
similar to those of the partnership firm or any other
profession, trade or business together with other
competitors belonging to the same type of profession,
trade or business so long as the partnership exists.
(3) A contract concluded among the partners in
restraining them from exercising a profession, trade
or business under the partnership firm for the
specified time or place after being separated from
the partnership;
(4) A contract restraining any individual from
receiving the service of any such an agency,
company, firm, individual or competitor of such
agency, company, firm, or individual for the
specified period of time after the retirement from
service or during the service of such an agency,
company, firm or individual pursuant to a contract
concluded by any individual with any such agency,
company, firm or individual.
(b) A contract restraining a marriage other than those
prohibited by the law;
(c) A contract restraining any one from enjoying the
facilities already being enjoyed by the general public;
(d) A contract restraining legal rights of any person from
being enforced by a court;
(e) A contract concluded on a matter contrary to or
prohibited by the law in force;
(f) A contract concluded for immoral purpose or against
public order or public interest;
(g) A contract which cannot be performed because the
parties thereto do not exactly ascertain or know about the
matter in relation to which it has been concluded;
(h) A contract which is impossible to fulfill at the time of
its conclusion or a fictitious contract;
(i) A contract the subject matter of which does not give a
reasonable meaning and is vague;
(j) A contract concluded by a person who is not competent
to conclude a contract;
(k) A contract that has an illegal purpose
(l) A contract concluded by mistake of both parties as to
the essential fact of the contract at the time of conclusion
of contract.
(3) A void contract is invalid from the very beginning and it
shall not create any legal consequence and rights and obligations
of the parties.
(4) In case any part of the contract becomes void, remaining
parts of the contract shall be enforceable according to law.
546. Voidable Contracts: (1) A contract which, at initiation of the
party to the contract, may be declared to be void by the court,
shall be deemed to be a voidable contract.
(2) The person aggrieved by any of following contracts may get
the contract declared to be void by a court:-
(a) A contract entered into by way of coercion;
Explanation: One is said to be subjected to coercion in cases
where property of such person has been detained or
threatened to detain or where he/she is threatened to put
his/her body, life or prestige in peril or where any other act
against law has been committed or threatened to commit
against him/her with an intention of causing him/her to enter
into a contract.
(b) A contract entered into by way of undue influence;
Explanation: (1) Influence exercised over a person who is in
one’s influence or who may be employed in work according
to one’s will with the intention of taking any unfair
advantage for the purpose of one’s concerns or interests shall
be regarded as undue influence.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (1), any of
the following persons shall be regarded as persons who is
under one’s influence or who may be employed in works
according to one’s will:-
a) A person who is under one’s guardianship, protection
or responsibility;
b) A person who is incapable to represent his/her interests
for the time being or forever because of old age, illness
or physical or mental infirmity;
c) A person who may be subjected to financial or official
influence.
(b) A contract entered into by way of fraud
Explanation: A contract is said to be entered into by way of
fraud in cases where a party to a contract does, with the
intention to deceive the other party of the contract or his/her
agent, any act that is likely to create an assurance that any
matter, which he/she has the knowledge that the matter is not
true, is true; or though he/she has the information about a fact
but he/she knowingly conceals such fact or commits any
other act that is a fraud under the prevailing law.
(d) A contract entered into by way of misrepresentation;
Explanation: Any of the following acts shall be considered
as misrepresentation:-
1) Presentation of false description on any matter
without reasonable basis;
2) Caused emotional disturbance to any party to
his/her detriment;
3) Causing any mistake on any matter of the
contract;
4) Assured to have concluded a contract in one
matter and but caused to enter into a contract in
any other matter.
(3) In a case of a voidable contract under this Section, the
following matters shall be applied to the followings:-
(a) The party caused to enter into a contract may, instead of
making the contract to be void, demand his/her position to
be remained the same, as it was prior to conclusion of the
contract.
(b) Onus of proof of innocence or undue influence shall be
vested upon the party who claims that such a contract is
not concluded under an undue influence in case a contract
is concluded with the person who is under one's influence
and amenable to his/her wishes.
(4) A voidable contract shall, before it is declared to be void, be
enforceable as if it were a lawful contract.
(5) In case a voidable contract under this Section is declared to
be void by a court, it shall not affect on the act done before
the contract is declared to be void.
(6) In case any contract is declared to be void under this Section,
there shall be no adverse effect on a legitimate right or
interest of a third person merely because of such a contract is
declared to be void.
547. Unenforceable Contracts: (1) A contract that cannot be enforced
from a court shall be regarded as a unenforceable contract.
(2) The following contracts shall not be enforced from a court
even though they were concluded having followed the process
referred to in Chapter 2 of this Part:-
a) A contract required to be in written form according to
law is not concluded in written form;
b) A contract required to be concluded having fulfilled any
particular formality or procedure but not concluded
having fulfilled such formality or procedure;
c) In case a contract is entered into on behalf of another
person, a contract concluded on the matter not authorized
by such a person or beyond the limitation of such
authority
548. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case at any time in case of a contract to
be void and within a period of one year from the date on which
the cause of action arises in case of a voidable contract and in
case of other contracts, within a period of two years from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter4
Provisions Concerning Performance of Contracts
549. Obligation under contract to be fulfilled: Each party to a
contract shall have to fulfill his/her obligation under the contract.
550. Reciprocal performance of contract: (1) In case a contract is
concluded with a condition that both parties to the contract shall
have to fulfill their respective obligations simultaneously, and in
case either party demonstrates a conduct or intention of not
fulfilling his/her obligation materially, the other party may not
need to fulfill his/her promise.
(2) In case an order of priority concerning fulfillment of any
promise has been specified in the contract itself, it shall be
fulfilled accordingly, and in case no such an order of priority
has been specified, the party who is required to do so first
according to the nature of the contract shall have to fulfill it first.
(3) In a contract containing reciprocal promises, in case one
promise cannot be fulfilled without fulfilling another promise,
the party which cannot perform the contract because of the
failure of the other party to fulfill its promise may recover the
loss and damage caused by the failure of the other party to
perform the contract.
(4) In case a contract is concluded pursuant to sub-Section (1), if
any party restrains the other party rendering it to be unable to
perform the contract, the party which is unable to perform the
contract may initiate to get the contract revoked and also to
recover any loss suffered by him/her due to its revocation in that
manner.
551. Time and Manner for performance of a contract: (1) In case
time and manner for performance of a contract has been
stipulated in the contract, it shall be performed within the
stipulated time according to the specified manner.
(2) In case no time or manner for performance of the act under
the contract has been specified in the contract, however, the act
under the contract is such that it could be performed only at any
specific time or according to any specific manner, the contract
shall be deemed to have been concluded to perform the act at
that time and according to that manner.
(3) Except in the circumstances referred to in sub-Section (2), in
case the time and manner for performance of the contract has
not been referred to in the contract, the contract shall be
performed within a reasonable time having followed reasonable
manner.
552. Place for performance of a contract: (1) In case any particular
place has been specified in the contract for performance of any
act under the contract, such an act shall be performed at the
same place.
(2) In case any party has to hand over or deliver goods to the
other party under the contract and the place to hand over or
deliver the goods has not been specified in the contract, the
contract shall be deemed to have been concluded with a
condition that the goods has to be delivered or handed over at
the place where such goods are located.
(3) In case a particular place for performing an act has not been
stipulated in the contract, however, the act may be done only at
a specific place or it has to be done in any particular place
having regard to practice or usage or nature of the act, it shall be
deemed that the contract has been concluded to perform it in that
place.
(4) In the events other than those referred to in sub-sections (2)
and (3), in case the place for performance of the act is not
referred to in the contract, the party performing the act
according to the contract shall ask the other party to specify a
reasonable place for performing the act, and the other party shall
have to specify a reasonable place to perform the act.
553. Performance of Contract deemed to be delayed: (1) In case of
a contract concluded to perform at or within any particular time
has not been performed within such time, performance of
contract shall be deemed to have been delayed.
(2) In case the contract referred to in sub-Section (1) could be
performed even after such a period of time, either party of the
contract may notify the other party to perform the contract
having given a reasonable time.
(3) Upon giving a notice pursuant to sub-Section (2), the other
party shall have to perform the contract accordingly and may
claim for compensation for the loss caused due to the delayed
performance of the contract.
(4) In case the contract is not performed pursuant to sub-Section
(3), the party notifying in such manner may revoke the contract.
554. Time to be regarded as Essence of Contract: (1) In case the
purpose or objective of the contract cannot be achieved if the
contract is not performed within particular date, time or period
having regard to the nature of the contract or intention of the
parties to the contract, the time for performance of such a
contract shall be regarded as the essence of the contract.
(2) In case either party of the contract does not perform the
contract referred to in sub-Section (1) within such a date, time
or period, such a contract shall be deemed to be breached and
the other party may rescind the contract forthwith.
555. Circumstances in which contracts need not be performed: In
any of the following circumstances, there would be no need to
perform an act under the contract or to perform the contract:-
(a) In case either party to the contract absolves the other
party from fulfilling the obligations under the contract;
(b) In case a voidable contract is declared to be void by
the party concerned;
(c) In case the contract cannot be performed for the reason
of breach of the contract by the other party;
(d) In case it becomes not necessary to perform the act
referred to in the contract according to any provision of
this Part;
(e) In case of a contract which is unenforceable according
to Section 559.
556. Devolution of rights and obligation of contract: In case a
party to a contract dies or becomes insane, the rights accruing
from the contract shall devolve on the successor to his/her
property, and the successor shall also have to bear the obligation
to the extent covered by the property succeeded by him/her.
Provided that, the rights and obligation accruing on the basis of
personal skills and qualification shall not devolve on such
successor.
557 Transfer of Right or Obligation under Contract: (1) Except
in cases where a contract has to be performed by the person
entering into the contract, the contract may be performed by
his/her agent, or by a person appointed by him/her or any other
person on his/her behalf or right or obligation under the contract
may be transferred.
Provided that, no party to a contract may transfer the obligation
under the contract to any other person without consent of the
other party.
(2) The following terms and conditions shall be met in order to
transfer rights and obligation pursuant to sub-Section (1):-
Unless otherwise provided for in the contract,
the transfer shall be in written form;
The transfer shall be without any condition;
No law or the contract has prohibited the
transfer of rights and obligation;
In case of transfer of rights and obligation,
information thereof have to be provided to the
other party.
(3) Once a party accepts an act done by the third person, he/she
may not claim later on that the act has to be done by the party
entering into the contract, except otherwise provided for in the
contract.
(4) In case two or more persons jointly enter into a contract with
any other party, any of the persons or all persons jointly entering
into the contract shall fulfill or cause to be fulfilled the
obligation under the contract, except otherwise provided for in
the contract.
(5) In case any person has fulfilled the obligation under sub Section (4), the person so fulfilling the obligations may recover
compensation or loss on a pro rata basis from other persons
jointly entering into the contract.
(6) In the contract concluded pursuant to in sub-Section (4), in
case any party gives concession to any person belonging to the
other party from the obligation of his/her share, the other
persons shall not be free from the remaining obligation of the
contract.
558. Only the party to have right to perform the contract: (1) Only
the person who is a party to a contract may demand for
performance of the contract from other party.
Provided that in case the contract is concluded for the benefit of
any person, such a person may demand for the performance of
that contract even though he/she is not a party to such contract.
(2) In case two or more persons jointly promise to do or forbear
to do any act, all persons concluding the contract may demand
for performance of that contract, except otherwise provided for
in the contract.
559. Contracts need not be performed in the event of fundamental
changes in circumstances: (1) In case it becomes impossible to
perform a contract as a result of fundamental change in the
circumstances existed at the time of formation of the contract, the
act according to the contract need not be performed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-Section (1),
emergence of any of the following circumstances shall be
deemed to have been occurred fundamental change in the
circumstance of formation of the contract:-
(a) In case the contract becomes illegal and thereby it
cannot be performed;
(b) In case it becomes not possible to perform the contract
due to emergence of the situations such as war, floods,
landslides, fire, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, which are
beyond human control;
(c) In case an element essential for performance of the
contract is destroyed or damaged, or exists no longer, or
such an element could not be obtained;
(d) In case of the contract concluded with a condition to
provide services on the basis of personal efficiency, skill
or talent, the person providing such service dies or
becomes insane or is incapable of performing the contract
because of physical or mental disability.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), none
of the following situations shall be deemed to be the
fundamental changes in the circumstance in the formation of the
contract:-
(a) In case it becomes difficult to perform the contract;
(b) In case profit margin is low or it causes loss;
(c) In case any party to the contract is dependent upon any
third party who is not a party to the main contract for
performing the contract and the third party commits a
default or becomes incompetent;
(d) In the event of strikes or lockouts;
(e) In case additional tax, fee or other revenue is required
to be paid;
(f) In case the contract is concluded with more than one
objective and some of them could not be fulfilled.
(4) In case of emergence of any of the circumstances referred to
in sub-Section (3), the parties may, except otherwise is provided
for in the contract, review or negotiate to alter the terms and
conditions of the contract.
(5) In case it becomes impossible to perform a contract because
of fundamental changes in the circumstances as referred to in
sub-Section (2), it shall be as follows in the following matters:-
(a) The amount paid by one party to the other prior to
occurrence of such change in the circumstances shall be
refunded to the other party.
(b) Payment to be made or due from one party to the other
according to the contract shall not payable after such a
change in the circumstance.
(c) In case any party has performed any act or paid any
amount before such a change in the circumstance, such act
or amount shall be calculated and the amount to be paid to
each other shall be determined, and reasonable expenses
incurred by one party according to the contract may be
recovered from the other party.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, the
parties to a contract may agree to fulfill their respective
obligations by continuing the performance of the contract after
the end of the circumstance referred to in clause (b) of sub Section (2).
560. Facilities to be provided: (1) The parties to a contract shall
have to provide facilities to each other that may be needed to
perform the contract from their respective sides.
(2) In case the contract could not be performed due to failure in
providing such facilities, the party failing to perform the
contract shall not be held responsible.
561. Contract may be suspended or altered: (1) In case the parties
to a contract agree, all or any of the portion of the act to be
performed under the contract may be changed or altered; the
time-limit for performing any act under the contract may be
extended; the contract may be suspended by not making it
obligatory to perform any act to be performed under the contract
for some time, the act referred to in the contract may be replaced
by another act, or a new contract may be signed as a substitution
of the original contract.
(2) In case any alteration or amendment is made in the contract
pursuant to Sub Section (1), a new contract shall be deemed to
have been signed, and the contract shall become effective
accordingly.
(3) In case a new contract is signed pursuant to sub-Section (2),
obligation under the initial contract need not be borne except as
otherwise provided for in the contract.
562. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter5
Provisions Concerning Breach of Contract and Remedies
563. Breach of Contract: (1) In case either party to a contract does
not fulfill the obligation under the contract, or gives a notice to
the other party that he/she will not perform the act to be
performed under the contract, or in case his/her action or
conduct shows that he/she is incapable of performing the act
under the contract, he shall be deemed to have breached the
contract.
(2) In case a party has breached the contract as referred to in
sub-Section (1), or in case his/her action or conduct shows that
he/she has not materially compiled with the contract, the other
party may revoke the contract by furnishing a notice thereof to
the other party.
(3) In case a contract has been revoked pursuant to sub-Section
(2), the party revoking the contract shall not be compelled to
comply with the contract.
564. Indivisible Nature of the Authority to Revoke Contract: In
case there are two or more persons in either party of a contract,
the contract may be revoked only if all of them revoke it or if it
is revoked in such a manner that revocation would be applicable
in case of all of them.
565. Compensation for Breach of Contract: (1) In case a contract is
breached pursuant to Section 1, the party aggrieved by it may
realize from the party who has breached the contract the actual
loss or damage suffered by him/her as a result of such breach of
contract or the loss or damage, which the contracting parties had
anticipated at the time of signing of the contract.
(2) In case any specific amount of compensation was estimated
in advance at the time of conclusion of the contract for breach of
the contract, the aggrieved party may be entitled to recover from
the other party a reasonable amount not exceeding that amount.
(3) In case the amount of compensation referred to in sub Section (2) has not been specified, the party making a claim for
such compensation may realize a reasonable amount for the
direct and actual loss or damage that has resulted from the
breach of contract.
Provided that no compensation may be recovered for any
indirect or hypothetical loss or damage.
(4) In case a contract has been concluded for completing any act
within a specific period, and in case provision has been made for
payment of compensation pursuant to sub-Section (1) for the
failure to complete that act within the specific period, the party
paying compensation may request for extension of the time for
completing the contract in proportion to the amount paid by
him/her as compensation.
(5) Payment of an amount of compensation itself shall not be
deemed to have caused adverse impact on the rights of the party
to seek other legal remedies.
566. Consequence of revocation or void of contract: (1) In cases
where a contract has been revoked upon mutual consent of both
parties after either party of the contract receives some cash or
kind or any other benefit from the other party or fulfillment of
the obligations under the contract partially or fully; in cases the
contract needs not to be performed under this Part or other laws
in force; in cases the contract is void according to a law or
declared to be void; in cases the contract becomes invalid or has
been revoked under this Part; such cash or kind shall be returned
having settled the accounts of the cash or kind given in such a
manner until the date of the contract being in force.
(2) In case any service or advantage other than cash or kind has
been given pursuant to sub-Section (1), the party receiving such
a service or advantage shall pay a reasonable amount to the
other party in lieu of such service or benefit.
Provided that no cash, kind or any other benefit received or
provided under the contract to be void pursuant to this Part shall
be recovered.
In case it becomes necessary to initiate legal action for not
returning the amount paid in cash or kind or non-payment of
amount under sub-Section (1), the concerned party may also
demand to recover reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose.
567. Quantum Meruit: In case any party breaches a contract or a
contract is discharged for any other reason, the aggrieved party
may claim for the payment in proportion to which he/she has
done the act or performed the contract.
568. Specific Performance of Contract: (1) In case the cash
compensation is not reasonable or adequate for the actual loss or
damage caused to the aggrieved party because of breach of a
contract, the aggrieved party may make a claim for specific
performance of the contract instead of making a claim for
compensation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
claim of specific performance may not be made in any of the
following circumstances:-
In case the cash is adequate as compensation for
breach of a contract;
(b) In case the court cannot supervise whether the act to
be performed under the contract has actually been
performed;
In case the contract has been concluded for
providing services concerning personal expertise,
skill or knowledge;
(d) In
contract
cannot
specifically
performed;
In case the party in breach of the contract claims for
specific performance of the contract.
569. Court May Issue Order: (1) In case it becomes impossible to
perform a contract because either party of the contract is about
to take any action or conduct in a manner contrary to the nature
of the contract, the party aggrieved by such action or conduct
may file a complaint at the Appellate Court requiring for a stay
order to prohibit such action or conduct.
(2) In case a complaint is filled pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
court may issue an appropriate order to any party to immediately
stop his/her particular action or conduct with a provision to
settle the dispute resulting from that contract according to the
contract or prevailing law.
(3) In case such an order is issued, the aggrieved party may also
realize the additional loss or damage resulting from the failure
of the other party to comply with the order issued pursuant to
sub-Section (1).
570. Compensation to be ascertained in Monetary Value: Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, assessment of
compensation of the loss shall be ascertained in monetary value.
Provided that in case of remedy referred to in Section 568, it
shall be as stipulated therein.
571. Court May Consider: While determining compensation arising
out of the reason of breach of a contract, the court shall have to
consider
whether
party
breached
contract
intentionally or it could not be performed due to negligence of
the party and also the amount or benefit receivable by the non385
defaulter party to the contract had the contract not been
breached.
572. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-6
Provisions Concerning Sale of Goods Contracts
573. Contract Concerning Sale of Goods: (1) A contract concerning
sale of goods shall be deemed to have been concluded in case
any seller agrees to hand over immediately or in the future any
goods to the buyer having received a price.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any type of movable or immovable property that may be
purchased or sold except the currency in circulation, security, or
an actionable claim.
(2) A contract concerning sale of goods may be conditional or
unconditional.
(3) A contract may be concluded with a provision to sell goods
owned or possessed by the seller for the time being or those to
be produced or acquired by him/her in the future.
574. Contract concerning sale of goods to be void: In case a contract
has been concluded to sell particular goods, and in case the
goods have suffered any loss at the time of, or before concluding,
the contract and the seller had no knowledge thereon at the time
of concluding the contract, the contract shall be void.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, 'specific goods'
means the particular goods referred to in the contract at the time
of concluding the contract.
575. Fixation of price of goods: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the price of goods shall be fixed on the basis of the
terms and conditions of the contract or according to the
procedure agreed upon in the contract or in the process of
transaction between the parties.
(2) In case the price of goods has been fixed according to their
weight and measurement, the price of goods shall be fixed on
the basis of the net weight and measurement of the goods,
except otherwise provided for in the contract.
(3) In case the price of goods cannot be fixed under Subsection
(1) or (2), the buyer shall pay to the seller a reasonable price
taking into account the concerned circumstances.
576. Price of Goods to be Paid: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the price of goods must be paid as follows in the
following circumstances:-
At the time of purchase of goods by the buyer the
price of goods shall be paid to the seller; or
(b) At the time of transfer of the goods.
(2) While making payment of the price of the goods, it shall be
paid in cash.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, 'cash' also
includes cheques payable through a bank, traveler's cheques,
promissory notes, bills of exchange, letter of credit, bank draft,
credit card and telegraphic transfers as well.
577. Description of goods: (1) In case the name, brand, trademark or
specification of any goods to be sold are referred to in the
contract, the contract shall be deemed to have been concluded to
sell goods of the same name, brand, trade mark or specification.
(2) In case the name, brand, trademark or specification and
sample goods to be sold have been stipulated, the bulk of the
goods shall not be corresponding only to the sample but also to
the name, brand, trademark or specification as stipulated in the
contract.
578. Title to be deemed to the goods to be sold: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the seller shall be deemed to have a
title over the goods sold if it is sold, or over the goods to be sold,
if agreed to sell in future, and that such goods is or shall be free
from custody, control or procession of any person.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the seller shall
be deemed to have the right to sell the goods sold or to be sold
by him/her.
579. Goods to be deemed to be of satisfactory quality: (1) Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, goods sold or to be sold
shall be deemed to be of satisfactory quality.
(2) In case any particular goods sold or to be sold for any
particular purpose are appropriate for that purpose, they shall
be considered to be of, or are of, satisfactory quality.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in
case the defect of any goods has been stipulated in the
contract or the buyer has the information of the defect before
the contract is concluded or while inspecting the goods, the
goods shall not be deemed to be of unsatisfactory or inferior
quality.
(4) In case the quality of any particular goods has been
stipulated in the contract, it shall be according to the contract
and if not stipulated therein, the goods shall be of the quality
according to the prevalent standard.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the seller shall
not be deemed to have warranted that the goods sold or to be
sold is having a particular quality.
580. Substandard Goods may be accepted or rejected: (1) In case a
seller delivers to a buyer the goods of different quality than that
of stipulated in the contract, the buyer may accept such entire
goods, reject such entire goods or accept any part thereof and
reject rest of the goods.
(2) In case any goods has been rejected entirely or in part, the
buyer may inform the seller either to deliver another goods
instead of such goods or in case the quality of such goods could
be improved, to improve the quality of such goods.
(3) In case the information is given pursuant to sub-Section (2),
the seller shall, according to the information given by the buyer
or the mutual understanding developed between them, deliver
another goods instead of such goods or improve the quality of
the goods delivered.
581. Sale through Samples to be made: (1) In case provisions have
been made in a contract to sell goods upon inspection of their
samples directly or indirectly, it shall be deemed that the
contract has been concluded to sell goods upon inspecting the
samples.
(2) In case a contract has been concluded to sell goods upon
inspecting the sample, it shall be deemed to have included the
following conditions, except otherwise provided for in the
contract:
(a) The bulk of the goods shall correspond to the samples in
quality.
(b) The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity to compare
the quality of the bulk of the goods with the sample.
(c) The goods sold or to be sold shall be free from any defect,
and that their satisfactory quality shall be apparent while
inspecting them at the time of comparing them with the sample.
582. Provisions concerning transfer of ownership of goods: (1)In
case a contract has been concluded to sell any particular or
certain goods, the transfer of the goods shall be made as
provided for in the contract, and if not provided in the contract,
it shall be transferred according to the conditions of the contract,
the conduct of the parties, and the intention of the parties
expressed through the relevant circumstances.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case a
contract has been concluded in such a circumstance that any
particular goods could be delivered immediately, the parties
shall be deemed to have the intention of delivering them upon
concluding the contract or upon payment of the price of the
goods.
(3) In case a contract has been concluded in such a circumstance
that a particular goods may be delivered immediately, and in
case the buyer has to weigh, measure and examine the goods or
to do any act to determine their price, such goods shall not be
delivered until such acts have been done and information thereof
is given to the buyer within a reasonable time.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, a contract
shall be deemed to have been concluded with a provisions to
transfer the goods at the very place where the goods has been
sold or is to be sold.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the title or
ownership of the buyer shall be deemed to have been established
on the goods from the very moment the goods is transferred to
him/her.
583. Risk to be borne: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the
contract, the seller shall bear the risk of any loss or damage to
such goods until they are transferred to the buyer.
(2) In case there has been delay in transfer of goods due to the
buyer or the seller, the party who has caused such delay shall
bear the risk of loss or damage under sub-Section (1).
(3) In case the seller has agreed to deliver goods from the place
of purchase to the place specified by the buyer, the seller shall
bear the risk of any loss or damage to goods, except otherwise
provided for in the contract.
584. Buyer's right to inspect goods: Upon the sold goods are
delivered to the buyer; the buyer shall have a reasonable
opportunity to examine and ascertain whether or not the goods is
according to the contract and until the buyer ascertains in such a
manner, he/she shall not be deemed to have accepted the
delivery of the goods.
585. Goods deemed to be delivered: The buyer shall be deemed to
have received the goods in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) In case the buyer or his/her representative receives the
goods;
(b) In case a receipt or memo is issued having acknowledged the
delivery of the goods;
(c) In case the buyer inspects the goods and ascertains that they
conform the contract pursuant to Section 584, and
accordingly keeps them in his/her store;
(d) In case the goods reach to the buyer and are retained by
him/her, even if he does not send information about his/her
refusal to accept them within a reasonable time limit,
(e) In case he/she does anything to prove his/her ownership of
such goods.
586. Time-limit for delivering goods: (1) In case the contract
provides that goods must be delivered at any particular time or
within any specified period, the seller must deliver the same to
buyer at that very time or within that very period.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the buyer accepts goods delivered by the seller before or
after the time or period prescribed in the contract, the seller
shall be deemed to have so delivered the goods.
587. Documents concerning sold goods to be handed over: Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, the ownership of goods
shall not be deemed to have been transferred after sale until
basic documents connected with their ownership or required for
their use are handed over.
588. Delivery of goods in a quality different from contract quality:
(1) In case the seller delivers goods to the buyer in a quantity
less than the quantity referred to in the contract, the buyer may
refuse to accept them.
Provided that, in case the buyer accepts goods even in such
quantity, he/she shall be required to pay the price of the quantity
at the rate referred to in the contract.
(2) In case the seller delivers goods to the buyer in a quantity
higher than the quantity referred to in the contract, the buyer
may accept the goods only in the quantity referred to in the
contract, and reject the rest or the entire quantity.
Provided that, in case the buyer accepts the entire quantity of
goods so delivered, he/she shall be required to pay for them at
the contract rate.
(3) In case the seller delivers to the buyer the goods mixed with
goods of a description different than included in the contract,
the buyer may accept the goods stipulated in the contract and
reject the rest, or reject the entire lot of goods.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the buyer shall
not be bound to accept delivery of goods in installments.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case the
buyer refuses to accept goods brought by the seller for delivery,
the buyer shall not be bound to return them to the seller.
Provided that the buyer shall inform the seller through the quick
means of communication about his/her refusal along with the
reasons thereof.
589. Special provisions concerning Compensation: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Part, action in respect to
compensation for contract under this Chapter shall be taken as
follows:-
(a) In case a buyer does not accept or refuses to accept or refuses to
pay the price of goods after conclusion of a contract concerning
sale of goods, the seller may, subject to the contract, claim
compensation from the buyer in consideration of the buyer's
failure to accept or refuse to accept the goods.
(b) While determining compensation under clause (a), in case goods
not accepted or rejected by the buyer are available in the market,
compensation shall be determined on the basis of the difference
between the price of goods referred to in the contract and the
market or current price.
(c) In case the seller does not deliver or refuses to deliver goods
according to the contract after concluding a contract concerning
sale of goods, the buyer may claim compensation from the seller
in for his/her failure to deliver the goods.
While determining compensation under clause (c), in case the
goods which the seller has refused or failed to deliver to the
buyer are available in the market, compensation shall be
determined on the basis of difference between the price of the
goods referred to in the contract and the market or current price.
590. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-7
Contacts Concerning Guarantee
591. Contract Concerning Guarantee: (1) Where a contract is
concluded on the condition that in case a person fails to repay a
loan borrowed by him/her or fails to fulfill an obligation
promised by him/her, a third party shall repay the loan or fulfill
the obligation, a contract concerning guarantee shall be deemed
to have been concluded.
(2) Where a third party provides guarantee pursuant to sub Section (1) and in case the person who has to repay the loan
does not repay it or does not fulfill the obligation to be fulfilled,
the person providing guarantee to such loan or obligation shall
have to repay the loan or fulfill the obligation according to
conditions of the contract.
(3) The terms and conditions of guarantee shall be as referred to
in the contract.
(4) Contracts concerning guarantee shall have to be concluded in
written form.
592. Surety's Obligation: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the
contract, the surety's obligation shall be as follows:-
(a) Obligation of the surety shall arise from the very time
when the person who has to fulfill the obligation fails to
fulfill it.
(b) Obligation of a surety shall be similar to the obligation
of the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill any
obligation and the surety shall remain liable until the person
becomes free from the obligation of repaying the loan or
fulfilling the obligation.
(c) In case a security and guarantee both have been provided
for any loan or obligation, the surety shall not be liable to
the extent covered by the security so provided.
(d) The obligation of a surety shall not be terminated merely
because the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill the
obligation becomes free from the obligation by operation of
contract
concerning
guarantee
shall
effective
immediately after the person who has to pay or fulfill the
obligation breaches the obligation to be paid or fulfilled and
the creditor may cause to fulfill the said obligation from the
surety.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Part, the term 'creditor'
means a person who has provided a loan and also includes a
person who may obtain any benefits from or have any act
done by the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill the
obligation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
the creditor shall have to furnish a notice to the borrower to
perform the contract according to the terms and conditions of
the contract before making a claim to the surety under the
guarantee contract for payment of the amount not paid or the
obligation not fulfilled according to the contract.
593. Circumstances in which surety to be absolved from
obligation: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the contract,
the surety shall be free from obligation to the following extent
in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) In case the person who has to repay a loan or fulfill an
obligation alters the terms and conditions of the contract,
without the approval of the surety, in such a way as to
have substantial impact on the contract; in respect of
transactions to be carried out after such alteration;
(b) In case a contract is concluded to absolve from
obligation the person who has to fulfill the obligation in
respect to which the guarantee was provided;
(c) In case the person who has to repay a loan or fulfill an
obligation is absolved from obligation or in case the loan
is written off due to the action of the creditor;
(d) In case the creditor agrees to absolve the borrower
from the obligation by recovering a sum less than what is
due or to provide additional time limit for repaying the
loan or not to initiate a lawsuit;
(e) In case any action of the creditor causes an adverse
impact to the surety's right to legal remedy against the
person who is under obligation to repay the loan or fulfill
the obligation;
(f) In case the creditor loses, damages or returns any
security obtained by him from the borrower, to the extent
of the value of such a security;
(g) To the extent to which the person who is under
obligation to repay a loan or fulfill an obligation has
repaid the loan or fulfilled the obligation according to
the contract.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
the surety shall not be deemed to have been absolved from
the obligation, except otherwise provided for in the contract,
merely because the creditor fails to initiate legal action
against the surety or try to realize the amount to be realized
by him/her on time.
(3) In case there are two or more sureties and in case the
creditor absolves any one of them from the obligation, the
other sureties shall not be absolved from their respective
share in the obligation.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3)
and (4), in case the share in the obligation of the
surety/sureties cannot be separated, no surety shall be
deemed to have been absolved from his obligation merely
because the creditor has absolved him/her from the
obligation.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the surety
shall not be deemed to have been absolved from the
obligation under the contract merely because a dispute
arises among the parties in relation to the contract, which
has been concluded for fulfillment of an obligation under
the contract.
594. Relationship between the Surety and the Borrower: (1) The
surety shall cause the person who is under obligation to repay a
loan or fulfill the obligation according to the contract.
(2) In case the borrower has supplied any property or security to
the surety for the guarantee provided by him/her while
borrowing a loan or assuming an obligation, the surety shall
not pledge, mortgage, sell, or otherwise transfer the title
thereto without the consent of the borrower.
(3) In case a guarantee is provided for any specific purpose, the
objective, nature or terms and conditions of that loan or
obligation shall not be altered without the consent of the
surety.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), it
shall be according to the contract on the matters with regard
to the relationship between a surety and a borrower in a
contract.
595. Surety to substitute creditor: (1) After the surety repays the
loan to be repaid by the borrower or fulfills the obligation to be
fulfilled by the borrower under the contract, the surety shall
substitute the creditor in regard to that loan or obligation, and
may initiate legal action against the borrower as a creditor.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, the total amount and interest to be accrued on that
amount or any other fee or amount payable thereto shall be paid
by the borrower to the surety for the loan repaid or the
obligation fulfilled by the surety on his/her behalf according to
the contract concerning guarantee.
(3) In case it becomes necessary to initiate legal action because
of failure of the borrower to pay the amount payable by him/her
under sub-Section (2), or in case any other expenses incur in this
regard, the surety shall also be entitled to recover such expenses
from the borrower.
596. Circumstances on which Contract Concerning Guarantee may
be invalidated: In any of the following circumstances, the
surety may get the contract concerning guarantee invalidated:-
(a) In case the guarantee was obtained from the surety by the
creditor him/herself or by any other person on his/her consent by
supplying misleading or false notice or information on the
matter of the transaction for which the guarantee was given;
(b) In case the matter of guarantee, property or facts were
hidden or not disclosed;
(c) In case the contract has been concluded with the condition
that a third person would also become a surety but the third
person has not consented to provide the guarantee.
597. Obligation of Co-sureties to be Equal: (1) In case two or more
persons provides joint guarantee jointly or separately for any
loan or obligation and in case the borrower fails to repay the
loan or fulfill the obligation, the co-sureties shall repay the loan
or fulfill the obligation or the requirements of the contract on an
equal basis, except otherwise provided for in the contract.
(2) While providing a guarantee jointly pursuant to sub-Section
(1), in case the guarantee was provided on a compartment basis,
the surety shall be liable to pay or bear the obligation to the part
for which he/she has provided the guarantee.
598. Continuous Guarantee: (1) In case a guarantee is provided to
be expandable to a series of transaction, it shall be deemed to be
a continuous guarantee.
(2) In case a provision of a guarantee as referred to in sub Section (1) is made, the surety shall be liable to the extent of the
amount of guarantee that could not be recovered in the entire
period of the guarantee contract irrespective of the number of
transaction made thereunder.
(3) The surety may, by giving a notice to the creditor at least
three months in advance, revoke the continuous guarantee for
the transaction to be made in the future.
(4) Unless otherwise provided for in the contract, in case of
death of the surety, the continuous guarantee shall be deemed to
have, ipso facto, be terminated.
599. Contract concerning Indemnity: (1) In case a contract is
concluded with a condition that a party to a contract shall bear
any loss or damage that may result from any action while
working under the direction of such a party to the other party or
to the third party, it shall be deemed to be a contract concerning
indemnity.
(2) In case a contract referred to in sub-Section (1) is concluded,
the person may be entitled to recover as compensation all or any
of the following amounts subject to that contract:-
(a) The indemnity amount referred to in the contract;
(b) In case any loss or damage is caused to a third person,
the amount to be paid or borne therefor;
(c) The amount of expenses on the case filed or defended by
him/her in connection with the contract concerning
indemnity;
(d) The amount of expenses involved in litigation, for failure
to pay the amounts referred to in clauses (a) to (c).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
while performing any act under the direction of any party, in
case any person acts with the malafide intention to cause any
loss or damage negligently to such a party or to a third person,
and in case the concerned party or the third person suffers a loss
or damage or as a result thereof, he/she shall personally be liable
for such loss or damage.
600. Provision concerning Subrogation: (1) In case any person
concludes a contract with any other person against any loss or
damage that could be caused by a third person to his/her
property, facilities, rights enjoyed by him or benefits that could
result from his/her business, the person concluding such a
contract shall have to bear the obligation thereof whosoever has
caused such loss.
Provided that in case a contract is concluded to recover the loss
from any other person, it shall be recovered from such a person.
(2) In case of the loss caused pursuant to sub-Section (1), it shall
be according to the contract if stipulated in the contract and in
case it is not stipulated in the contract, a reasonable amount or
compensation shall be paid or shall cause to be paid to the
person affected by the loss or in case of his/her death, to his/her
successor.
(3) In case there is any loss or damage as referred to in sub Section (1), the person paying the amount or compensation
under Subsection (2) shall be deemed to have subrogated the
person who has sustained the loss or damage, and accordingly,
the subrogator may have the amount or compensation for such
loss or damage recovered from the person causing such loss or
damage.
601. Rights of Subrogator: The rights and liabilities of a subrogator
shall be as referred to in the contract, if any, and if not, they
shall be as follows:-
(a) All the rights, under the contract, of the person who has
sustained loss or damage shall devolve on the subrogator.
(b) The subrogator referred to in clause (a) may recover from the
person who has caused the loss or damage, or from the party to a
contract concluded in that connection, if any, the amount or
reasonable compensation paid by him/her to the person who has
suffered the loss or damage, as well as the expenses incurred for
litigation, if any.
602. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter8
Provisions Concerning Contracts of Bailment
603. Contract Concerning Bailment: (1) In case a person delivers
any goods to another person with a condition to return him/her
or to hand it over to any other person or to sell it as ordered by
him/her, a contract concerning bailment shall be deemed to have
been concluded.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any movable property other than currency in circulation
and also the title over such property.
(2) While concluding a contract pursuant to sub-Section (1), a
deed shall have to be executed while bailing any property the
price of which is more then twenty five thousand rupees.
604. Bailment deemed to be completed: (1) The process of bailment
shall be deemed to have been completed once the bailee receives
the goods under bailment.
(2) In case any property has already been kept by any person or
a person authorized by him/her under his/her custody or control,
the concerned property shall be deemed to have been taken as
bailment.
605. Details of bailed property to be stated: (1) In case a bailor
knows that the bailed property is not usable due to any defect in
it, or it may cause any harm or loss or that separate provisions or
arrangement must be made for its protection, he/she shall, to the
best of his/her knowledge, inform the bailee about all such
matters.
(2) In case the information that has to be supplied under sub Section (1) is not supplied even having knowledge about it, the
bailor shall be liable to the harm or damage caused by that
property or because of that goods to the bailee.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
while utilizing any goods bailed, in case any harm or loss is
caused by the goods because of defects of such goods, the bailor
shall be liable for the harm or loss so caused even if he/she does
not have any information as to the defect in the goods bailed.
606. Bailee's Obligation: (1) A bailee shall have to take reasonable
care and afford protection of the goods received by him/her as
bailed goods as referred to in the terms and conditions of the
contract, and as his/her own goods in case nothing has been
referred to in the contract.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case any
bailed goods is lost, stolen, damaged, depreciated, decreased or
destroyed because of a natural calamity despite taking
reasonable care and affording protection pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the bailee shall not be liable to return such goods.
Provided that, in case the goods is lost, stolen, damaged,
depreciated, decreased or destroyed because of negligence or
malfide intention of the bailee, or of his/her failure to take care
or failure to afford protection according to the terms and
conditions of the contract, he/she shall be liable to return the
goods or pay an equivalent amount to the bailor.
(3) In case the bailee uses the bailed goods without having the
right to do so under the contract or in a manner contrary to the
terms and conditions of the contract, and in case such use causes
any loss, damage, destruction, depreciation or harm to the goods,
the bailee shall have to pay compensation to the bailor.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the bailee
shall not mix-up the bailor's goods with his/her own goods.
Provided that, in case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods
with that of the bailor, both parties shall have title on that goods,
as well as to the income accruing therefrom, in proportion to
their respective shares.
(5) In case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods with that of
the bailor and the goods so mixed-up could be separated, the two
parties shall have title to their respective goods so separated,
and the costs incurred for separating the goods so mixed up and
the loss caused, if any, to the bailor while mixing up such goods
in that manner shall be borne by the bailee.
(6) In case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods with that of
the bailor without the consent of the bailor and their goods could
not be separated as referred to in sub-Section (5), the title of the
bailor to the bailee's goods shall be terminated if he/she agrees
to obtain his/her share from the goods so mixed-up.
(7) In case the bailor does not agree to take his/her share from
such goods pursuant to sub-Section (6), the bailee shall have to
pay compensation for his/her goods.
607. Bailed Goods to be returned: (1) After the expiry of the period
prescribed while bailing goods or fulfillment of the objectives
for which the goods has been bailed, the bailee shall have to
return the bailed goods to the bailor.
(2) In case the goods is not returned under sub-Section (1)
within the specified period or within a reasonable period
according to the nature of the goods where no such period is
specified, or in case the bailor does not take it back and the
goods is lost, stolen, damaged, destroyed or reduced after that
date, or bailor suffers any loss or damage due to such goods
after that date the party because of which such loss or damage is
resulted shall bear the loss or damage.
(3) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in the case of
a bailed goods owned by several persons, it may be handed over
to any one of such owners or to the person ordered by them, and
such hand over of the goods shall be deemed to have been duly
done.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the goods
raised or earned through the bailed goods shall also belong to
the bailor.
608. Person bailing other's goods to be held responsible: In case
any person bails any goods, over which he/she has no title, right
or ownership, to any other person to keep as a bailed goods, and
in case the bailee has to bear any claim of a third party or any
loss, damage or any cost incurred while accepting that bailment,
the bailor shall be liable to pay such costs as well.
609. Goods given for repair and maintenance to be returned: (1)
In case any goods is given for repair, improvement or renovation
in any manner whatsoever, the goods shall be returned to the
owner having charged the costs incurred or the service charges
levied for the service of repair, improvement or renovation.
(2) The goods given under sub-Section (1) shall be returned to
the concerned owner having repaired, improved or renovated it
within the period specified in the contract. In case the goods is
not returned within the specified period, or any additional loss
or damage is caused to the goods or the goods is so damaged
that it has become unusable in the course of repair, improvement
or renovation, it shall be as provided for in the contract, and if
no provision has been made in the contract, a reasonable amount
of compensation shall be paid to the concerned owner.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the person who repairs, improves or renovates any
goods may keep it with him/herself until the cost of repair,
improvement or renovation or the service charge levied for that
purpose is paid. In case the cost or service charge is not paid
within a reasonable period, the person repairing, improving or
renovating the goods may recover his/her expenses or service
charges having sold the goods.
610. Bailment Costs: While bailing goods, the costs incurred for
looking after and affording protection of the bailed goods shall
be borne by the bailor, except otherwise provided for in the
contract.
611. Contract concerning bailment to be void: (1) In case it is
proved that any goods is bailed with the intention of avoiding a
partition of joint property or payment of any government
revenue or any amount involved in any claim to be paid to
anybody or for any other unlawful intention, the contract
concerning such bailment shall be void.
(2) In case the bailee does not keep the bailed goods according
to the term and conditions of the contract, the bailor may get the
bailed goods returned at any time.
612. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -9
Provisions Concerning Collateral or Deposit Contracts
613. Contracts Concerning Collateral or Deposit: (1) In case any
person takes a collateral while providing a credit to anyone as a
security for that credit or obtains any property as a deposit in the
form of a guarantee for performance of any act, it shall be
deemed to have concluded a contract concerning collateral or
deposit.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any movable or immovable property and title or
document establishing title to that property.
(2) In case a collateral is taken while providing a credit, the
credit and the interest to be accrued thereon and in case any
deposit is obtained to perform any work, the other costs
concerning that work and the costs incurred for taking care of
the collateral or deposit shall also be deemed to have been
included in the contract concerning collateral or deposit.
614. Collateral or deposit to be returned: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the collateral obtained for a credit
shall be returned upon repayment of the credit or the deposit
obtained for an act shall be refunded to the concerned person
after the completion of the performance of such an act.
(2) In case the collateral or deposit taken under sub-Section (1)
is or may be divided into different parts, the collateral or deposit
may be returned to the extent covered by the portion of the
credit repaid or the act performed.
615. Rights of person accepting collateral or deposit: (1) In case a
credit is obtained having pledged any goods as collateral and the
borrower fails to repay the credit or the interest accrued thereon,
if any, within the specified period, the person who has taken the
collateral may initiate action according to law and recover the
amount to be recovered for the credit having sold or auctioned
the collateral according to current market price or transfer the
ownership of such collateral in his/her name subject to law, in
case it cannot be sold or auctioned.
(2) In case the goods pledged as collateral is sold at a price
lesser than the amount to be recovered from the borrower by the
person who has taken the collateral under sub-Section (1), the
shortfall amount may be recovered from other assets of the
borrower. In case the collateral is sold at a price higher than the
amount to be recovered, the excess amount shall be refunded to
the borrower.
(3) Notwithstanding anything containing in sub-sections (1) and
(2), in case the goods pledged as collateral has not yet been sold
or its ownership has not yet been transferred, the person who has
pledged the goods as collateral may clear his goods by repaying
the credit and interest thereon and any other amount payable at
any time.
Provided that, the person who pledges the goods as collateral
shall also be liable to bear additional liability incurred on the
goods pledged as collateral owing to his/her failure to repay the
amount within the specified period.
(4) In case anyone is entrusted with the responsibility of
performing any act having accepted any goods as deposit, and if
the concerned person fails to complete the concerned act within
the specified period, the goods pledged as deposit may be used
to complete the act or to recover the costs incurred thereupon.
(5) In case the act cannot be completed from the goods pledged
as deposit, the shortfall amount may be recovered from the other
assets of the person who furnishes the deposit.
616. Consequences of pledging goods without title as collateral or
deposit: (1) In case anyone has availed a credit or an act having
pledged as collateral or deposited any goods to which he/she has
no title or ownership or any goods received under a contract
which is void under this Part and the person obtaining such a
collateral or deposit has no knowledge of this fact, the person
taking the goods on collateral or deposit may demand the goods
from the person who has given the collateral or deposit the
goods to which he/she has a title and in case the collateral or
deposit could not be pledged as demanded, the person taking
such a collateral or deposit may get the contract to be void.
(2) In case any goods received under a void contract is pledged
as collateral or deposit, and such a contract has already become
void before furnishing such collateral or deposit or the party
receiving the collateral or deposit had the knowledge that the
concerned goods did not belong to the person pledging it as
collateral or deposit, the person obtaining such goods as
collateral or deposit shall have no right over such goods and
he/she may recover the amount to be recovered by him/her or
have the work performed from the other goods of the party
pledging the collateral or deposit.
(3) In case the person who pledges the collateral or deposit has a
partial or limited title to, or ownership of, the goods pledged as
collateral or deposit, the person accepting such goods as
collateral or deposit shall also have title to that goods to the
same extent.
617. Creditors to be on pari pasu Position: (1) In case anyone has
availed credit from several creditors in one or several
installments having pledged his/her goods as collateral and the
goods so pledged as collateral is not sufficient to repay the
credit of all the creditors, except otherwise provided for in the
contract, all the creditors who have taken the goods as collateral
shall be deemed to be on pari pasu position in respect to the
credit outstanding and all of them may make a proportionate
claim on the goods accordingly.
(2) The contract entered into giving priority right in future to a
creditor on the goods already pledged as collateral pursuant to
sub-Section (1) shall be void. In case the creditor has already
recovered his/her credit from the collateral before the contract
becomes void even while having knowledge that there are other
creditors in respect to the collateral, he/she shall have to refund
the amount to the other creditors and recover his/her credit from
the other assets of the person who has pledged the goods as
collateral.
618. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter10
Provisions Concerning Agency Contracts
619. Contracts Concerning Agency: Any person may appoint any
other person as his/her agent to do anything on his/her behalf,
except the matter connected with his/her personal skills, to
conduct business as his/her agent or carry on any transaction
with a third person on his/her behalf or to represent him to such
a person, or to establish any type of legal relation with the
person appointing an agent and a third person, and in case an
agent is so appointed, a contract concerning agency shall be
deemed to have been concluded.
620. Recognition of transaction carried out by Agent: (1) A person
who may carry out something himself/herself may carry out or
cause to be carried out the same through an agent, subject to the
Provided that no act may be carried out through an agent for
which one has to be present in person.
(2) The contract concluded through an agent appointed pursuant
to Section 619 or the act performed by the representative shall
be deemed to have been carried out by the concerned person and
the obligation arising out of such an act shall be implemented
having recognized it as the contract concluded or the act carried
out by the principal.
Provided that, the principal shall not be liable for any act carried
out by the agent beyond his/her authority except in case he/she
has accepted such an act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), out
of the acts performed beyond the authority, in case some of the
acts are within his/her authority and some are beyond it and in
case the part performed within his/her authority can be separated,
the principal shall be liable for acts performed to the extent of
the authority.
621. Sub-agents May be appointed: (1) In case it is necessary to
appoint a sub-agent according to the nature of any trade,
business or transaction or a sub-agent may be appointed having
regard to the provision of the contract or usage, the agent may,
except otherwise provided for in the contract, appoint a subagent with the consent of the principal.
Provided that an agent who has been appointed on the condition
that he/she shall personally represent or personally carry out any
act may not appoint a sub-agent.
(2) In case a sub-agent is appointed pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the principal shall be informed accordingly, and the sub-agent so
appointed in that manner shall have right and duty equal to that
of the agent appointed by the principal.
(3) In case any agent appoints a sub-agent without the consent
of the principal, the principal shall not be liable for any act done
or work performed by the sub-agent.
(4) The agent appointing the sub-agent shall be personally liable
for the acts referred to in sub-Section (3).
622. Matters to be complied with by Agent: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, an agent shall comply with the
following matters:-
(a) Acts to be carried out subject to the conditions of the
contract concerning agency and the directives issued by
the principal.
(b) In case no condition is stipulated in the contract or the
principal does not issue any directive, the agent shall
work as entrusted to him/her in the manner in which it
has to be performed according to the nature of the
business and the laws and usages of the place of
transaction, with bona fide intention, full dedication and
necessary skills and efficiency.
Provided that in case the principal has a knowledge in
advance that the agent has no efficiency or capacity on
any matter, the agent shall not be liable for any loss or
damage resulting from such lack of efficiency or
capacity.
(c) An agent who has been removed from his/her position
shall not continue to do anything on the same matter as
in the capacity of an agent.
(d) The agent shall have to give or show the details of
account and records concerning the agency business as
and when required by the principal.
(e) In case any obstruction, obstacle or difficulty arises in
the course of performing works concerning an agency,
the agent shall notify the principal as soon as possible
and obtain necessary directives, and the principal shall
be liable for any action taken according to the directives
so issued.
(2) In case the principal suffers any loss or damage because of
the failure of the agent to fulfill his/her duties under clauses (a),
(b) and (c), the agent shall personally bear loss or damage so
incurred.
623. Agent to be responsible: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agent shall be personally liable for
transactions made by him/her on behalf of the principal in the
following circumstances:-
(a) In case he/she concludes a contract with a third party
in relation to any transaction with provision for
personal responsibility.
(b) In case any work has been done for or on behalf of an
undisclosed principal, in case the principal is not
disclosed;
(c) In case the principal cannot be sued for any reason;
(d) In case the contract is concluded in his/her own name;
(e) In case anything is done in contravention of the
contract concerning the appointment of agent or
beyond his/her authority;
(f) In case any misrepresentation or fraud has been
committed in the course of the transaction;
(g) In case the agent has to bear personal obligation
according to the nature of the trade;
(h) In case the interest of the agent is also involved in the
transaction.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract concluded
between the agent and a third person, merely the fact that the
agent is personally liable under sub-Section (1) shall not be
deemed to have prejudiced the right of the third person to make
any claim against the principal and legal action may be initiated
against the principal as well for arrears due from the agent.
(3) For the purpose of initiating legal action against the
principal pursuant to sub-Section (2), the statutory limitation
shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of the last
payment made by the agent.
624. Principal to be Liable for Inducement to Believe for Having
Authority: (1) If the principal has informed or induced to
believe a third person that he/she has given authority to any
other person to act on his/her behalf, the principal shall be liable
for any act done by the agent on his/her behalf unless the third
party has come to know or has reasonable ground to have
knowledge that the authority is not given.
(2) In cases referred to in sub-Section (1), the principal may be
liable even for the acts done by the agent beyond the authority
given, if there is a reasonable ground to believe that the agent is
given authority.
625. Termination of Agency: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agency shall be deemed to have, ipso facto,
been terminated in the following circumstances:-
In case the agent voluntarily informs the Principal
not to continue as an agent;
(b) In case the principal revokes the authority granted or
contract concluded with the agent or gives a notice
agent
regarding
impossibility
performance of the contract;
In case the agent has been appointed for any specific
business and that business is completed;
(d) In case the agent has been appointed for a specific
period, such a period is completed;
In case the principal or the agent dies or becomes a
person of unsound mind;
In case the principal is declared to be a bankrupt;
(g) In case the matter for which the agent has been
appointed no longer exists;
(h) In case an agent is appointed by a body corporate if
such body corporate is liquidated or dissolved.
(2) All or any of the authority granted by the principal to the
agent may be revoked at any time before the agent exercises
them and in case the authority is so revoked, information thereof
shall immediately be given to the representative.
Provided that, in case the agent has already exercised some of
such authority, the work performed regarding to the authority
shall not be deemed to have been revoked.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the agent has a share in the property connected
with the main matter of the agency, the agent may not be
removed, in such a manner so as to have an adverse impact on
such share.
626. Agent not to be removed: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, in case an agent is appointed for any specific
period or work, the principal shall not remove him/her before
that period or before the completion of that work without
reasonable and sufficient grounds.
(2) An agent who is appointed without specifying any certain
period or work may not be removed without a prior notice
giving appropriate reasons;
(3) In case the principal removes any agent in a manner in
contravention of sub-Section (1) or (2), the principal shall pay a
reasonable compensation to the agent.
627. Agent not to give up agency: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, except otherwise provided for
in the contract, the agent who is appointed for a specific period
or work shall not give up work as an agent before the expiry of
the specific period or completion of the specified work without
reasonable and sufficient grounds.
(2) An agent who is appointed without specifying the period or
work under sub-Section (1) shall not give up that work without
informing the principal in advance along with the reasons
therefor.
(3) In case any agent gives up the work in that capacity in
contravention of sub-Section (1) or (2), the principal may claim
a reasonable compensation.
628. Sub-agent also to leave if agent leaves: In case an agent no
longer remains in that capacity under this Part, the sub-agent
appointed by him/her shall also be deemed to have, ipso facto,
be removed.
629. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-11
Contracts Concerning Transportation of Goods
630. Contracts
Concerning
Transportation:
contract
concerning transportation shall be deemed to have been
concluded if it provides for the transportation of goods from one
place to another.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, a receipt or a
bill to be issued by the transporter to the owner of goods for
transportation of the goods at the time of handing over for the
purpose of transportation shall be recognized as an evidence of
contract concluded between the transporter and owner of the
goods.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term
'transporter' means a person operating a transport service other
than air or marine transport or a person operating a business of
such transportation, and the term also includes a person
operating the transport business through internal navigation
transport, rope ways or animal or any other means.
Provided that, in case any person employed by the owner of
goods on wage basis or his/her agent or a person working under
his/her supervision transports goods, such a person shall not be
recognized as a transporter for the purpose of this Chapter.
631. Transporter's obligations: (1) It shall be the obligation of the
transporter to transport the goods received from the owner of the
goods for transportation at the specified destination and in its
proper condition.
(2) In case goods received from the owner for transportation is
lost, destroyed, broken, defaced, damaged or in case the goods
cannot be delivered in proper condition for any manner
whatsoever, the transporter shall be liable therefor.
(3) The transporter shall have to transport goods within the time
specified in the contract and within a reasonable time in case no
period for transporting the goods has been specified in the
contract, and transport and hand over the goods to the owner or
his/her agent or a person designated by him/her.
632. Transporter Receiving the goods to be liable: In case goods is
to be transported by more than one transporter or though more
than one means of transportation, except otherwise provided for
in the contract, the transporter to whom the owner of goods has
handed over the goods shall personally be liable for the purpose
of this Chapter.
633. Obligation of transporter to be limited: (1) Except in cases
where the owner of goods or his/her agent has clearly declared
at the time of concluding a contract or except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the compensation for the loss or
damage of the goods transported by the transporter shall not
exceed ten thousand rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
transporter shall not be liable for any loss or damage of gold,
sliver, diamond, jewelry or goods made thereof, precious stone,
negotiable instruments, securities, documents registered at
offices, certificates issued by academic and other institutes,
coins, bank notes, postal stamps, fish, meat, fresh fruits and
vegetables,
insecticide
toxic
materials,
inflammable
materials, petroleum products, precious fine art works, idols,
curio goods or glass or goods made of glass or the goods that are
highly breakable or fragile, wildlife and domestic animals and
avian, handicraft products, arms and ammunition, explosives,
radio, television, computer and so on and their spare parts,
machinery and the goods specified in the law in force as the
goods to be declared by the owner before the transportation,
except the owner or his/her agent has clearly declared at the
time of conclusion of a contract or at the time of handing over
the goods to the transporter for transportation.
(3) For the purpose of bearing the risk involved in the
transportation of the goods referred to in sub-Section (2), the
transporter may insure the goods through the owner of the goods
or his/her representative or insure the goods on his/her own
having charged separate fee to the owner or the transporter may
make other necessary provisions for mitigation of the risks.
634. Transporter to be Liable: In case of loss or damage of the
goods which has been declared at the time of concluding a
contract under this Chapter or at the time of handing over the
goods to the transporter for transportation or to the goods that
needs not be declared, the transporter shall pay in case anything
stipulated in the contract and if nothing is stipulated therein,
reimburse the goods transported with the consent of the owner
of the goods or in case there is no consent or the consent cannot
be determined, the price of such goods and even the price of the
goods cannot be determined, a reasonable amount of price and
also compensation for the damage or loss to the owner of the
goods shall have to pay to the owner, subject to Chapter 5.
635. Termination of Transporter's Obligation: Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the obligation of a transporter shall
be deemed to have terminated in any of the following
circumstances:-
In case the transporter or his/her representative
transports and hands over the goods to the owner or
his/her agent, or a person designated by him/her;
(b) In case the goods handed over to the transporter is
received back by the owner or his/her agent.
In case the transporter or his/her representative
returns
goods
owner
his/her
representative showing reasons for the goods that
cannot be transported within the specified period for
arising out of any circumstance referred to in clause
(b) of sub-Section (2) of Section 559 of Chapter-4 of
this Part.
636. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter12
Provisions Concerning Lease Contracts
637. Lease Contract deemed to be concluded: (1) In case a
contract has been concluded with a condition that any person
gives any other person any goods under his/her title and
ownership to use and enjoy the benefits to be derived therefrom
for a certain period for getting rent regularly, it shall be deemed
to have concluded a lease contract.
Explanation: (1) For the purpose of this Chapter, “goods"
means any type of movable or immovable property from which
benefit may be acquired having utilized or used it without
diminishing it.
In a contract concluded pursuant to sub-Section (1), unless
otherwise provided for in the contract, the lessor has to make
sure the lessee of the following matters:-
(a) To transfer certain goods to be transferred for use
according to the contract;
(b) the goods transferred pursuant to clause (a) to be
maintained in good condition so that it may be used or
utilized at the time of the transfer
(c) To make a provision that the goods transferred pursuant
to clause (a) or (b) could be used or utilized peacefully
and without any interruption.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the goods that would be destroyed while using or
consumable goods may not be given on lease.
Provided that such goods may be given on lease for using them
for particular purpose without consuming them.
638. Form of the Goods given for lease not to be changed: During
the period of lease contract, no change may be made in the
fundamental form of the leased goods.
639. Goods on lease to be used in good faith: (1) The lessee shall
have to use and utilize the goods taken under a lease contract in
good faith and in prudential manner like the goods of his/her
ownership.
(2) While using or utilizing the leased goods pursuant to sub Section (1), it shall be used or utilized according to the
objectives of the lease contract.
(3) While using or utilizing the leased goods pursuant to sub Section (1) or (2), necessary provision of security shall be made
according to the nature of such goods.
(4) In case it is proved that the leased goods has been used in
contravention of sub-Section (1), (2) or (3), the lessor may at
any time terminate such a contract.
640. Leased Goods to be repaired: (1) Unless otherwise provided for
in the lease contract, the lessor shall repair the goods taken
under the lease.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in case
the goods taken under lease could not be used or utilized
without repair, maintenance or reform immediately, the lessee
himself/herself may repair, maintain or reform such goods
having informed the lessor.
(3) The lessor shall have to reimburse or adjust in rent the expenses
incurred for repair, maintenance or reform made pursuant to
sub-Section (2).
641. Lessor to be informed: (1) In case the goods taken on lease
according to a lease contract or any part thereof is lost or
destroyed or turned to be unusable or non-utilizable or any
person makes a claim over it or raises a dispute about such
goods in any manner whatsoever or creates hindrance or
disturbances while utilizing the goods, the lessee shall inform
about it to the lessor immediately.
Upon receipt of the information pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the lessor shall have to carry out repair, maintenance,
reform or seek legal remedies as may be necessary to bring back
the goods in the previous condition according to the nature of
the goods within a period of fifteen days.
In case the leased goods could not be brought back to the
previous condition, the lease rent amount shall be deducted in
proportion to the extent to which such goods was lost or
destroyed or not used or utilized or hindered or disputed about.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the loss or damage has been caused due to the
use or usage of the leased goods by the lessee, a member of
his/her family, employee, worker or agent in contravention of

Section 3, the lessee shall be liable for it and he/she shall have
to bring back the goods in the previous condition accordingly.
642. Lessee to be responsible for loss or damage of the leased
goods: (1) The lessee shall use or utilize the leased goods
having adopted adequate measures of safety in order to save the
leased goods from loss or destruction.
(2) In case the goods under a lease is lost or destroyed for any
reason while the lease contract is in force or it is lost or
destroyed in any manner or it is damaged because of negligence
of the lessee, any member of his/her family, his/her agent or of
the third party and the price of the goods is decreased, the lessee
shall be liable for it and for that he/she shall have to pay
compensation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1) or (2),
the lessee shall not be liable for the loss or damage caused to the
leased goods due to the natural calamities (force majuere).
In case of partial loss or damage of leased goods because
of natural calamity (force majuere) referred to in sub-Section (3)
and in case the lessor does not or could not bring it back to the
previous condition, the lessor shall have to reduce the lease rent
in proportion to the loss or damage.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "natural
calamity" means any of the following natural calamities:-
(a) A storm, earthquake, eruption of volcano;
(b) Excessive
rain,
floods,
landslide,
soil,
erosion,
thunderstorm;
(c) Fire caused by any manner, except caused by intention,
negligence or recklessness of the lessee, his family
member, employee, workers or third party;
(d) Terrorism, civil riots, civil war;
(e) Other natural calamities of similar nature beyond
control of human being.
643. Lease Rent to be Paid: (1) The lessee shall pay to the lessor
the lease rent according to the terms and conditions of the lease
contract.
(2) In case the terms and conditions of payment of the lease rent
are not specified pursuant to sub-Section (1), the lease rent shall
be paid on the next day of end of each month in case of movable
property; within fifteen days of the end of every fiscal year in
case of farmland, servitude, industrial or infrastructure
construction or housing land and within one week of end of
every month in case of other goods.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case any person does not let the lessee to use such
goods or any part thereof having created disputes or any type of
hindrance or obstruction about the leased goods or any part
thereof, the lessee may reduce the lease rent proportionally.
644. Period of Lease Contract: (1) No lease contract with regard to
the following goods shall remain valid for more than the
following period:-
(a) Thirty years in case of the housing land leased for building
construction or the house and land in use having
constructed the home;
(b) Thirty years in case of the land leased for the purpose of
servitude;
(c) Thirty years in case of the land leased for the purpose of
industrial structure or construction, development and
operation of infrastructure like roads, canals, electricity
generation;
(d) Thirty years in case of land for farming;
(e) Nineteen years in case of house and land leased for the
purposes other than those referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c)
and (d);
(f) Fifteen years in case of transport vehicles;
(g) Fifteen years in case of machinery equipment other than
transport vehicles;
(h) Fifteen years in case of machinery equipment other than
those referred to in clauses (f) and (g);
(i) Ten years in case of domestic animals;
(j) Ten years in case of goods other than those referred to in
this Section having regard to their life and nature.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
parties may extend the duration of the lease contract subject to
the lease term of the contract, before expiry of the period
referred to in the said sub-Section.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), the
parties to the contract may decide whether or not to extend the
duration of the lease terms having regard to the place of location
of the house and land under the lease contract and the nature of
the goods.
645. Leased Goods may be sub-leased: (1) The lessee may, having
obtained a prior approval of the lessor, sub-lease to any person a
goods or any part thereof leased once under a lease contract
having entered into a sub-lease contract.
The lessee shall not be relieved from obligation towards
the lessor for the reason of the second lease pursuant to sub Section (1).
The terms and conditions with regard to the goods given
under sublease contract shall not be inconsistent with the terms
and conditions of the first lease contract.
While determining the terms and conditions of a lease
contract pursuant to sub-Section (3), provision may be made that
the sub-lessee shall be directly responsible to the lessor with
regard to the leased good and in case such provisions are made,
he/she shall be responsible to the lessor to the extent of the sublease contract.
The period of validity of the lease contract concluded
pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall not exceed the period of
validity of the lease contract concluded between the lessor and
the lessee.
In case the lessor seeks legal remedies under this Chapter
or makes a claim against the lessee, the sub-lessee shall not be
responsible towards it except in the cases referred to in sub Section (4).
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the rights which a lessor may exercise under a lease
contract shall not be deemed to have been hindered in any
manner.
646. Goods taken on lease to be Returned: (1) In case a lease
contract terminates for any reason whatsoever, the lessee shall
have to return back the goods taken on lease under this Chapter
to the lessor within a period of seven days of the termination of
the lease contract.
Provided that in case of an immovable property, it shall be
deemed that the lessor shall, ipso facto, have right to use after
seven days of the expiry of the lease contract.
The goods taken on a lease pursuant to sub-Section (1)
shall be returned back on the same condition as it was at the
time of taking on lease.
Provided that the lessee shall not be liable for decay or
depreciation in natural course while using or utilizing the goods.
In case record of the goods or its accessories and spare
parts had been maintained at the time of taking on lease, the
goods and its accessories and spare parts shall also have to be
returned while returning goods on lease pursuant to sub-Section
(1) or (2).
Provided that the accessories or spare parts that used to be lost
or destroyed while using according to nature of the goods need
not to be returned.
647. Special Provision concerning lease contract of immovable
property:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, lease contract of immovable property shall be
concluded in written form.
(2) While leasing out an immovable property for a period more
than ten years, it shall be registered with an agency legally
authorized for that purpose having specified the same
contents.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter,
immovable property may not be leased to the person who
may not acquire immovable property in Nepal according to
law for the purpose of farming, building construction or
housing development without approval of Government of
Nepal.
(4) The building, shed or other structure built by the lessee or
the garden, forest or trees located in a land leased according
to a lease contract shall, except otherwise provided for in
the contract, be deemed to be under the title and ownership
of the lessee and accordingly, he/she shall have to remove
such building, shed, or structure or garden or forest and
trees from such land.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (4) in
case the lessor desires to take back such building, shed or
other structure or garden, forest or trees located in such land
on as it is basis, he/she shall have to pay a mutually agreed
price for the same.
648. Lease contract may be terminated: (1) The
lessor
terminate the lease contract in any of the
following
circumstances:-
(a) In case the lessee does not pay the lease amount within
a period of ninety days after the date scheduled for
payment of the lease rent is over without permission of
the lessor;
(b) In case the goods taken on lease is used or utilized in
contravention of Section 639;
(c) In case lessor is not informed or given information on
the matters on which information shall have to give the
lessor pursuant to sub-Section (1) of Section 641;
(d) In case the leased goods is not brought back to the
previous
condition
within
reasonable
period
according to the nature of the goods pursuant to sub Section (4) of Section 641;
(e) In case the goods leased has been sub-leased again
without approval of the lessor.
The lessee may terminate the lease contract in any of
following circumstances:-
(a) In case the goods could not be used or utilized for the
purpose or objectives for which it has been taken on
lease;
(b) In case the lessor does not bring back the goods taken
on lease pursuant to sub-Section (4) of Section 641;
(c) In case the lease rent amount is not reduced or agreed
to reduce pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section 640;
(d) In case the lease rent amount is not decreased or agreed
to be decreased pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section
641 and or sub-Section (4) of Section 642.
649. Provisions Concerning House Rent to Apply: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the provisions
referred to in Chapter-9 of Part 4 shall apply in case of house
rent.
650. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -13
Provisions Concerning Hire Purchase Contracts
651. Hire purchase contract deemed to be concluded (1) In case
anyone hires any goods to anyone on the following terms and
conditions, it shall be deemed to have concluded a hire purchase
contract:-
(a) The owner of the goods permits the person taking on hire
to use such goods with a condition to pay the amount in
installment in periodic basis for that goods;
(b) The person taking on hire the goods may purchase the
goods on hire according to the terms and conditions of
contract;
(c) The ownership of such goods to be transferred to the
person taking the goods on hire upon payment of the
final installment amount;
(d) The person taking on hire may terminate the contract at
any time prior to the transfer of ownership pursuant to
clause (c).
(2) The contract referred to in sub-Section (1) shall be in written
form.
(3) The owner of the goods shall have to make available one copy
of the contract concluded pursuant to this Section to the person
taking on hire free of cost.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) " Goods" means any movable property that may be given
on hire for the purpose of using it;
(b) "Person taking on hire" means the person who receives
any goods on hire for use according to a hire purchase
contract and also includes his/her successor or other third
person to receive the goods under such contract in the
event of his/her death.
652. Matters to be specified in a hire purchase contract: (1) The
following matters shall be specified in the contract referred to in

Section 651:-
(a) The goods concerning the contract and its short
description;
(b) Hire purchase price of the goods concerning the contract;
(c) Cash price of the goods concerning the contract;
(d) The date on which the contract is deemed to be
commenced;
(e) The installment amount payable by the person taking on
hire to the owner of goods and number of installments;
(f) The date of payment of each installment and the method
of payment;
(g) The person and place for payment of amount pursuant to
clause (f).
(2) In case the installment amount may be paid by any method other
than cash pursuant to clause (f) of sub-Section (1), its brief
description shall be specified in the hire purchase contract.
(3)In case a hire purchase contract has been concluded without
stipulating the terms and conditions referred to in this Section,
the person taking the goods on hire may file a complaint to get
such contract rescinded and in case the court deems that nonstipulation of any of such terms and conditions in the contract
causes adverse effects to the person taking on hire, court may
revoke such contract or may issue any order as it deems fit.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) "Hire purchase price" means the total amount to be paid
by the person taking the goods on hire to purchase or
acquire the goods having paid full price of the goods and
also includes the amount to be paid as deposit or down
payment.
(b) "Cash price" means the price to be paid in cash with
which the person taking on hire may purchase any goods.
653. Conclusion of more than one contract to be deemed as
conclusion of a single contract: (1) If separate contracts are
concluded in connection with conclusion of a hire purchase
contract such as the contract between the person taking on hire
and the owner of the goods; between a surety or investor and the
owner of such goods for payments of the hire purchase price
installment or in case of bailment of any goods, between the
bailor and the bailee of such goods, they shall be deemed to be a
single contract for the purpose of this Chapter.
In case where the contract referred to in sub-Section (1)
have been concluded in different dates, the latest date shall be
regarded as the date of conclusion of the contract.
654. Consequences of Conclusion of a Hire Purchase Contract: (1)
Notwithstanding any other thing contained in the contract
between the parties, the following terms and conditions shall be
deemed to be inherent in a hire purchase contract concluded
under this Chapter:-
(a) The right of uninterrupted use of the goods on hire by
the person taking the goods on hire;
(b) The goods to be free from any type of charge or claim
of any one at the time of transferring the goods by the
owner of the goods to the person taking on hire the
goods pursuant to clause (a)
(c) The owner of the goods has assured the person taking
on hire the goods of providing him/her a reasonable
opportunity to compare such goods with the sample;
(d) Right of the owner of the goods to sell such goods at
the time of transferring the goods by the owner to the
person taking on hire;
(e) The goods referred to in clause (a) has the satisfactory
quality at the time of transfer of the goods, and
(f) In case the person taking on hire has informed the
owner of the goods that he/she is hiring the goods for
any particular purpose, the owner of the goods has
guaranteed that such goods or its quality is
appropriate for that purpose.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of sub Section (1), the owner of the goods shall not be liable for the
quality of the goods in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) The owner of the goods could not know the defect in
the goods for which hire purchase contract was
concluded at the time of concluding the contract;
(b) The hire purchase contract itself has a stipulation
about defect of the goods;
(c) In case the quality of the goods matches with the
sample while matching by the person taking on hire;
(d) The hire purchase contract was concluded with regard
to a second hand goods and the matter was specified
in the contract.
In case the person taking goods on hire takes the
goods on hire on the basis of a sample, the owner of the goods
shall be deemed to have assured of the fact that all of such
goods matches with the sample.
In case a contract has been concluded under this Chapter
and any goods or its quality has been specified in the contract, it
shall be deemed that the owner of the goods has assured of the
fact that such goods or its quality shall be as specified in the
contract.
Provided that in case the sample is also stated in the contract,
matching of the quality of such goods with that of the sample
may not be enough and it shall have to be matched with the
description of the contract.
655. Transfer of ownership of goods: Ownership of the goods
related to the hire purchase contract shall be transferred to the
person taking the goods on hire upon completion of the purchase
according to the hire purchase price determined in accordance
with the contract concluded under this Chapter.
Provided that the right to use shall be deemed to have been
created at the time of receiving such goods by him.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "completion of
purchase" means the payment of the last installment of the hire
purchase price.
656. Care and maintenance of goods taken on Hire: (1) The status
of the goods taken on hire shall be as of the bailment until the
transfer of its ownership pursuant to Section 655.
Unless otherwise provided for in the hire purchase
contract, the person taking on hire the goods concerning such
contract shall take reasonable care and maintain the goods as the
goods in his/her own ownership.
In case such goods is lost or damaged because of not
taking reasonable care of and lack of maintenance, the person
taking on hire shall be liable for that.
657. Installment amount to be paid: The person taking on hire the
goods shall have to pay the installment amount as determined in
the hire purchase contract for hiring the goods within the time
and according to the method as stipulated in the said contract.
658. Contract may be terminated by paying installment amount:
(1) The person taking on hire may, having given an advance
notice of at least fifteen days to the owner of the goods and
having paid the hire purchase price of the goods or the amount
of remaining installment, terminate the hire purchase contract.
While terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the person taking on hire may be entitled to the discount, if any.
659. Contract may be terminated having returned goods: (1)The
person taking on hire may, at any time prior to payment of the
last installment as determined according to the hire purchase
contract for the goods, terminate the contract having given a
written notice to the owner of the goods at least fifteen days in
advance.
Prior to terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the person taking on hire shall have to return the goods
taken on hire to the owner according to the hire purchase
contract and if there is any amount due to be paid such amount
shall also have to be paid.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in
case the person taking on hire has paid more than half of the hire
purchase price prior to terminating the hire purchase contract,
he/she does not need to pay any more amount and in case he/she
has paid less than the half amount, he/she shall have to pay up to
the half of the amount.
Nothing contained in sub-Section (3) shall be deemed to
have waived the person taking on hire from paying any other
amount, charge or dues to be payable according to the hire
purchase contract.
660. Person taking on hire may transfer right and interest: (1)
The person taking on hire may, having obtained approval of the
owner of the goods, transfer to any other person the rights,
interests or liability over the goods he/she has taken on hire
according to the hire purchase contract and other rights or
interests to be available to him/her under such a contract.
(2) For the purpose of sub-Section (1), the owner of the goods
shall have to give approval or deny approval within a period
of fifteen days of the date on which the person taking on hire
has made a written request with an intention of getting
approval from the owner to transfer his/her rights and
interests and in case the approval could not be obtained
within the said period, he/she shall be deemed to have denied
the approval.
(3) In case the owner of the goods denies pursuant to sub Section (2), the person taking on hire may file a complaint at
a court within thirty five days to get the denial revoked and
in case the court issues an order that the denial is not
reasonable, it shall be deemed that the approval has been
obtained from the owner of the goods.
(4) Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to have
hindered to utilize or exercise the rights, interests or liability
in case where such rights, interests or liability of the person
taking on hire have been transferred to another person by
operation of law.
661. To be liable in case of use of goods against terms and
conditions: The person taking on hire shall be liable for using
the goods concerning the hire purchase contract against the
terms and conditions of such a contract.
662. Information of actual condition of goods to be given: The
person using the goods relating to the hire purchase contract
shall, within a period of fifteen days in case the owner has asked
to inform the owner of the goods about where the goods is
located in what condition and the benefits to be derived from it
are in what condition.
663. Owner of Goods to may terminate Contract: (1) In case the
person taking on hire fails to pay more than one installment of
the hire purchase price to be paid to the owner of the goods
according to the hire purchase contract, the owner of the goods
may, having furnished an advance notice to such a person as
stated herein below, terminate the hire purchase contract at any
time:
(a) In case the installment amount is to be paid within a
period of one week or less than that period, of one
week.
(b) In the cases other than those referred to in clause (a),
of fifteen days.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the person taking on hire makes the payment of the
installment and the interest to be accrued thereon according
to the hire purchase contract before expiry of the time frame
for furnishing the advance notice under the said sub-Section,
the hire purchase contract shall not be terminated.
(3) In case the person taking on hire does not follow the hire
purchase contract or the terms and conditions referred to in

Section 656 or 662, the concerned owner of the goods may
terminate the hire purchase contract having given a notice of
at least fifteen days.
(4) Upon terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the owner of the goods may exercise the following rights
with regard to the goods given on hire:-
(a) To return the goods wherever and in whatsoever
situation it may be, and if could not be returned, to
be seized;
(b) Out of the amount paid in lieu of such goods, the
amount that may be recoverable as hire may be
retained and the person taking on hire to be informed
to take the excess amount;
(c) To forfeit the amount taken as deposit from the
person who takes on hire at the time of giving the
goods on hire, if any;
(d) To enter into the house in which the goods is located
with the assistance of police in connection with
seizure of the goods taken on hire;
(e) To recover compensation from the amount paid or
make a claim for the loss or damage caused due to
failure to return the goods taken on hire on time or
failure to fulfill the contracts or the terms and
conditions referred to in Section 656 or 662.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, in case the person taking on hire or surety or
investor has already paid at least the basic price of the
goods taken on hire, the owner may not terminate the hire
purchase contract under this Section.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "basic price"
means three fourth of the amount in case of the price up to fifty
thousand rupees and at least half of the price in case the hire
purchase price is more than that amount.
(6) In case the owner of goods terminates the hire purchase
contract in contravention of sub-Section (5), the person
taking on hire or the person providing guarantee shall be
relieved from all liabilities to be fulfilled according to the
hire purchase contract and he/she shall be entitled to refund
the entire amount paid for hiring the goods by him/her.
Provided that he/she shall have to return the goods taken on
hire to the concerned owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section(5),
restriction to terminate the contract shall not be deemed to have
hindered in any manner the right of the owner of the goods to
make a claim for the hire purchase price to be received from the
person taking on hire according to the hire purchase contract.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the owner of the goods may terminate the hire purchase
contract entered into with the person who does not make
available the information referred to in Section 662 and if any
loss or damage is caused to such goods, the owner may make
claim the same as well.
664. Rights of person taking on hire in case of forfeiture of goods:
(1) In case of forfeiture of the goods given on hire by the owner
of the goods pursuant to clause (a) of sub-Section (4) of Section
663, the person taking on hire shall be entitled to refund the
amount paid for the hire purchase price until the day of
forfeiture and the amount equal to the price of the goods on the
date of forfeiture from such person.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "the price of
goods on the date of forfeiture" means the amount to remain
having deducted the following amount from the amount that may
be recovered from the sale of the forfeited goods:-
1) Reasonable expenses incurred while forfeiting the
goods;
2) Reasonable expenses incurred for storage, repair and
maintenance of the goods;
3) Reasonable expenses incurred while selling or
transferring the goods in any other manner;
4) The amount paid as taxes, charges, fees or dues if
unpaid for the goods by the person taking on hire
according to the laws in force.
(2) The amount referred to in sub-Section (1) shall be paid to
the person taking on hire within thirty days of the date of
forfeiture of the goods and while making payment thereafter,
an interest at the rate of ten percent per year shall also have
to be paid.
665. Status of the Goods on Hire in case person taking on hire
becomes Bankrupt:
(1) In case any court decides at a time while the hire purchase
contract is in force that the person taking on hire has become a
bankrupt or is likely to be a bankrupt according to the laws in
force for the time being and as a consequence thereof, the
liquidator or any other equally competent person taking control
of the property of such person shall exercise the rights and
fulfill the obligations as the person taking on hire with regard to
the goods concerning the hire purchase contract.
In case the person taking on hire is subject to bankruptcy
and the proceedings concerning it is under consideration by a
court, the liquidator or the person exercising the rights equal to
the liquidator pursuant to sub-Section (1) may, having obtained
approval of such court, handover the goods concerning the hire
purchase contract to any other person in any manner whatsoever
and in case such goods has been handed over in such a manner,
the person receiving the goods shall exercise the rights and
fulfill the obligations as the person taking on hire under the hire
purchase contract.
666. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -14
Provisions Concerning Wages
667. To Employ in work: (1) Any person who has attained the age of
at least fourteen years may be employed in a work with his/her
consent.
Provided that the person who has not attained the age of sixteen
years may not be employed in hazardous business or work.
While employing any one pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
provisions of this Chapter have to be followed or cause to be
followed.
668. Wages to be paid: (1) While employing anyone in any work
pursuant to Section 667, the person who employs him/her in the
work shall have to pay wages in proportion to the work except in
the cases where one agrees to be employed in the work on
his/her own without a wage.
While paying wages pursuant to sub-Section (1), if any
particular rate of wage is specified with the agreement between
the person employing in work and the person employed in work,
it shall be paid accordingly and if no such rate is specified, the
wage shall be paid according to the rate prevailing in the place
of work.
Except otherwise agreed upon between the persons
employing in and employed in work pursuant to sub-Section (1)
or (2), the wage shall be paid upon completion of the work.
While determining the wage according to this Section, the
wage shall be determined on the basis of each day of work
except otherwise agreed upon between the persons employing in
and employed in the work.
669. Provisions of Safety Measures to be made: While employing
anyone in any work, the employer shall have to make the
provisions of adequate safety measures to prevent the possible
risk or danger according to the nature of such work.
670. Working hours not to be more than eight hours: (1) While
employing any one in a work under this Chapter, normally one
may not be employed in work for more than eight hours a day.
(2) In case one is employed in work for the period more than as
referred to sub-Section (1), the consent of the person to be
employed in work shall be obtained and while employing
him/her in the work, eight hours shall be regarded as one day
and for every hour of extra work, the extra wage shall be paid in
the same proportion.
671. Special Provisions Concerning Domestic Helper: (1) While
employing any one as a domestic helper, the person who
employs him/her in work shall have to abide by the following
terms and conditions as well:-
The wages to be paid having determined the wage in
monthly or annual basis;
Foods to be provided for three times viz. at morning,
afternoon and evening and clothes to be provided to
wear as are suitable to the weather according to
capacity of the person who employs in works;
Facilities of using appropriate housing and toilet to
be given according to one's capacity;
In case one is less than eighteen years old and he/she
wishes, provision to be made for studies at
appropriate time having regard to household works;
Provision of treatment to be made in case of illness;
Provided that the expenses to be incurred in the
course of treatment may not be deducted from
his/her monthly or annual wage amount.
Not to employ in work at the time of illness and in
other time as well, not to employ in works that
he/she could not do due to his/her age, capacity, or
condition;
In case of death, the expenses to be incurred in
performing the obsequies rites to be borne by the
person who employs him/her in work;
Not to commit degrading or inhuman treatment or
sexual harassment,
Not to remove from work without a reasonable
cause;
To abide by the additional terms and conditions
agreed upon between the domestic helper and the
person who employs him/her in works.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2) of

Section 670, the provisions of the said Section shall not be
applicable while employing a domestic helper in works.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "a domestic
helper" means a person who is employed in household works on
the condition that he/she may be employed in the works at any
time as may be necessary.
672. Assigned works not to be left incomplete: (1) No person shall
have to leave the work taken to complete or undertaken to
complete without completing it except on reasonable grounds.
In case any one leaves the work incomplete as referred to
in sub-Section (1), the person leaving the work shall bear the
liability therefor.
673. Wages to be paid to the worker: (1) The wages to be paid for
employing in works shall be paid to the person who is employed
in the work or to any other person with his/her consent.
In case the worker dies prior to payment of wages
pursuant to sub-Section(1), the wages he/she is entitled to shall
be paid to his/her nearest successor.
674. Limitation: A person aggrieved on any matter under this
Chapter may file a case within a period of three months on
which the cause of action arises with regard to matters provided
for in Section 671 and within a period of thirty five days with
regard to other matters.

Chapter-15
Provisions Concerning Indirect or Quasi-Contracts
675. Obligation to arise from indirect or quasi-contract: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter 2 of this Part, in
case any certain, lawful, voluntary and unilateral act that may
create juridical relationship, is done, it shall be deemed to be an
indirect or quasi-contract.
(2) In case an indirect or quasi-contract is resulted pursuant to
sub-Section (1), an obligation under this Chapter shall be
created from the same fact.
676. If other’s property managed voluntarily, not to be deserted
(negotiorum gestio): In case any person manages or operates
the business or property of any other person on his/her own
without information to, or authority from, that person; such
business or property shall not be deserted so long as the business
or property continuous to exist or without handing it over to
such a person or his/her successor or representative or until such
a person substitutes him/her.
677. Damage to be paid for negligence of property taken: (1) In
case any person takes property of anyone else for taking care or
management, he/she shall have to take care and manage the
property in good faith as if that is his/her own property.
(2) In case the person who takes the property pursuant to sub Section (1) causes loss or damage with malafide intention by
negligence, he/she shall pay compensation therefor.
678. Not absolved from obligation by delegation of authority:
In case any one has been entrusted with an obligation to do any
act from him and in case he/she delegates his/her all or any
authority to a third person without prejudice to the obligation
towards such a person, he/she shall not be absolved from his/her
obligation for the reason of delegation of the authority.
679. Carriers of goods may protect and save goods: (1) In course
of transportation of any goods, there occurred a natural disaster
or an accident whereby such goods could not be transported to
the specified destination and thereby, the goods is going to be
perished or its price or quality is going to be materially
diminished, the person who undertakes to transport such goods
may sell the goods even without approval of the owner of such
goods.
(2) In case such goods sold pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
person transporting such goods shall pay such amount to the
owner of the goods.
680. Carriers to bear obligation: In case any goods is stolen, lost,
damaged before such goods is delivered to the concerned person
after its transportation by a carrier of such goods, the carrier
shall be liable for it.
Provided that in case such goods is lost, damaged or destroyed
because of a natural disaster or an accident, the carrier shall not
be liable.
681. Reasonable costs to be paid for saving property at the time
of natural calamities: In case any person saves or protects any
property at the time of occurrence of natural calamities such as
fire, flood, landslide, storm, earthquake without information to
its owner, the owner of such goods shall have to reimburse the
reasonable expenses incurred to save or protect such property.
682. Reimbursement may be claimed: (1) Though any person is not
compelled under a law to fulfill any obligation, if he/she fulfills
the obligation in his/her own expense or for any other reasons,
and thereby any other person gets anything or benefit for that
reason, the person fulfilling such obligation may claim for
reimbursement from the person getting such thing or advantage
in such a manner.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the obligation has been fulfilled for any unlawful objective,
such reimbursement may not be claimed.
683. Amount of rearing a person may be claimed: In case anyone
has rears any person without information to the person who is
under an obligation to rear such a person, the person rearing in
such a manner may claim an amount from the person under the
obligation.
Provided that in case he/she rears the person out of compassion
or gratification or with an intention not to make a claim of the
amount for rearing, such an amount cannot be claimed.
684. Heir to reimburse funeral expenses: Where a person dies and
any third person performs the funeral acts of the deceased
according to his/her rites, traditions and culture without
information to the successor or close relative of the deceased
person; and if the person claims the expenses incurred while
performing such acts, the nearest successor and in his/her
absence, the close relative shall have to reimburse the amount
incurred therefor.
685. Rearing expenses of person of unsound mind to be borne by
relative: In case the person under an obligation to rear or take
care of a person of unsound mind, a person with physical
infirmity or any helpless minor having no income of his/her own
denies to rear such a person and if any third person rears or
takes care of him/her, such a person may claim for
reimbursement of the expenses incurred therefor from the person
who is under such an obligation.
686. Expenses of treatment to be paid: In case any person meets
with an accident or he/she is seriously ill and any person, other
than his/her successor living in the same family, relative or
close person, conducts or causes to conduct treatment of such a
person voluntarily, the successor, relative or close person shall
reimburse the expenses incurred while conducting treatment in
such a manner.
Provided that in case the treatment is conducted or caused to be
conducted without an intention to claim the reimbursement, the
expenses need not to be reimbursed.
687. Expenses of Public Bodies to reimburse: Whoever does not
voluntarily follow the necessary measures of health and safety
measures required to be followed according to law for protection
of body, life or property of his/her own or of general people and
because of the same, any government or public body follows or
causes to follow such measures, the person shall have to pay
reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose even if he/she
does not agree to follow such measures.
688. Amount paid by person having stake to reimburse: Where a
contract is concluded to pay by any other person an amount to
be paid by one person according to law but he does not pay it, if
the person who has to pay according to law pays the said amount,
he/she shall have to reimburse.
689. Price or Remuneration to pay: In case any person gives
anything or orders to do any work to any other person, he/she
shall have to pay the price of the thing or remuneration
according to the work.
690. Price of goods or services to recover: Where any goods or
service has been made available to any person who is
incompetent to enter into a contract according to law or to the
person who is responsible to take care of such person, the price
of such goods or service may recovered from the person
receiving such goods or service.
691. Property in custody to be kept as Bailment: Whoever keeps
into his/her custody property of other's that could be kept
according to law shall have to keep such property as a bailment.
692. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter16
Provisions Concerning Unjust Enrichment
693. Unjust Enrichment to be deemed: (1) In case any person
acquires anything or any benefit for the reason of doing an act
or fulfilling an obligation by any other person, the person
receiving such thing or benefit is said to have acquired an unjust
enrichment.
The unjust enrichment referred to in sub-Section (1) shall
deemed
acquired
following
circumstances:-
In case there is an increment in one’s property or
decrease in liability;
In case one acquires services from other or cause
some one to do the work.
In case another’s assets is used.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1) or
(2), in case anyone acquires movable or immovable property or
any advantage or benefit in any manner whatsoever, except in
the following circumstances, he/she shall be deemed to have
acquired unjust enrichment:-
Any movable or immovable property or any
advantage or benefit may be acquired from any
person under a law or contract;
The person from whom any movable or immovable
property or any advantage or benefit is acquired; it
is acquired on free consent without returning back or
reimbursing it.
(4) In determining whether or not and to what extent a person
obtains an enrichment under this Chapter, no regard shall be had
to any disadvantage or loss caused thereby to such a person after
the enrichment.
(5) The person who acquires unjust enrichment according to this
Section shall bear the obligation according to this Chapter.
694. Matters not to be taken, if taken, to be returned (solutio
indebiti): In case any person takes or receives under mistake
anything which he/she has not to take or receive, he/she shall
have to return the thing to the person from whom he/she has
taken or received the thing.
695. Debt paid under mistake to be refunded: In case any person
pays a loan to anyone under a mistake that he/she is indebted to
him/her and which is not to be paid, the person receiving such
amount shall have to refund such amount if he proves that such
amount is not required to be paid.
696. Goods or amount taken with malafide intention and benefit
thereof to be returned: (1) In case any person receives with
malafide intention any amount or goods in which he/she has no
ground to claim, he/she shall have to return such amount or
goods and the interest to be charged on such amount or the
advantage or return to be accrued from such goods from the date
of receiving such amount or goods to the date of its return.
In case the amount or goods received pursuant to sub Section (1) is lost or damaged for any reason whatsoever, he/she
shall have also to pay the compensation therefor.
697. Debt paid by third person to be paid: In case a debt liable to
be paid by a person is paid by a third person without his/her
knowledge, the debt he/she has paid shall have to be paid to the
person who has paid the debt.
698. If Tax payable is paid by another person, reimbursement
may be claimed: In case a tax payable by a person is paid by
any other person, the person paying the tax may claim
reimbursement thereof from the person who in under a duty to
pay it.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, “tax” means any
type of government fee, tariff, duty, fine and the word also
includes local taxes as well.
699. Goods found may be kept giving information to police: (1) In
case any person finds any goods in any manner, he/she may,
having given a notice thereof to the police, safely retain such
property along with him/her until the concerned owner is traced
The concerned owner shall have to bear the expenses
incurred for tracing out the owner of the goods and retraining
the goods as referred to sub-Section (1) and unless the expenses
are paid, the person receiving the goods may retain the goods.
In case no person makes or claim on the goods retained up
to three year pursuant to sub-Section (1), the goods belongs to
the person finding the goods.
700. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -17
Provisions Concerning Torts
701. Torts deemed to be committed: (1) No person shall cause loss
or damage in any manner to any one's person, life or property or
legally protected right or interest by way of a default,
recklessness
negligence
omission
himself/herself or of anyone to whom one has to bear the
obligation according to this Chapter.
In case parties do not have a pre-contract relationship as to
the act or omission as referred to in sub-Section (1), the loss or
damage to be caused as a result of such an act or recklessness
shall be regarded as to have committed a tort.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "omission" means
a condition in which one has not carried out what he/she is
supposed to carry out.
(3) In case of commission of a tort pursuant to sub-Section (2),
one who commits the tort shall have to pay compensation.
In case the tort committed pursuant to sub-Section (2) is
caused due to anyone’s own omission, default, negligence or
recklessness, the quantity of compensation shall be less.
702. Parents to be liable for loss or damage caused by minor: For
a tort caused by a minor who has not attained the age of
fourteen years, the father, mother living along with him/her or if
there is no father or mother, the person exercising maternal or
paternal authority over him/her shall bear the liability thereof.
703. Guardian to be liable for loss or damage caused by a person
of unsound mind: For the loss or damage caused by a person of
unsound mind, his/her guardian shall be liable and accordingly,
she/he shall bear the liability.
704. Employer to bear liability: (1) For the loss or damage caused
by a domestic helper while being employed by anyone as in the
capacity of a domestic helper, the person employing him/her in
the work shall be liable and accordingly, he/she shall bear the
liability.
(2) While bearing the liability referred to in sub-Section (1), the
person employing him/ in work may deduct the amount from the
remuneration, allowance or facilities which the domestic helper
is entitled to.
(3) In case any loss or harm is caused to anyone by an act
carried out in good faith in the course of doing such act by a
worker or employee engaged by an employer, the person, firm,
company or organization engaging him/her in the work shall
bear the liability.
705. Owner of Animal to be liable for loss or damage caused by
Animal: For the loss or damage caused to any one by the
animal kept by, or under the control of, a person, such an owner
of the animal shall bear the liability.
Provided that the owner of the animal shall not be liable in cases
where the loss or damage is caused at the time while the owner
of the animal had kept the animal in control in appropriate
manner having adopted adequate protective measures according
to behavior of the animal or the loss or damage is caused due to
any act, default or recklessness of the person who has suffered
the loss or damage.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "animal" means a
domestic animal or wildlife or avian of any type under one's
control and the word also includes a domestic, reptile or wild
avian as well.
706. House owner to be liable for loss or damage caused by
collapse of House: In case a house as a whole or any part
thereof collapses at the time of construction or at any time upon
completion of its construction and it causes any loss or damage
to any one, the concerned house owner shall bear the liability
thereof.
707. Owner of Property to be liable: In case any of the following
incidents happens for the following reasons and any one suffers
a loss or damage therefrom, the concerned property owner shall
bear the liability thereof:-
(a) In case a machine, equipment or engine explodes for not
adopting safety measures in appropriate manner according
to its nature;
(b) In case of firing or explosion occurred for not adopting
safety measures in case of any inflammable or explosive
materials in appropriate manner according to its nature;
(c) In case any industrial enterprises produce excessive smoke
and sound contrary to the prescribed parameters;
(d) In case of falling down or causing to fall down of trees on
any highway, road, street, way except for natural disaster
or by an act of third person.
(e) In case of disposition of dirty or toxic matter or matter
spreads
communicable
diseases
canals,
waterways pipes or sewerage openly without adopting
precautionary measures in an appropriate manner in
contravention of the set norms.
708. House Head to be liable: In case anyone suffers loss or damage
because of mishandling of waste materials and garbage of any
type from any house, the concerned house head shall bear the
liability thereof.
Explanation:
For the purpose of this Section,-
(a) "House" means a house or shed and the word includes a
structure of a house.
(b) "House head" means the person working as the main
person in a family and also includes the person working as
the main person in case of living on rent in a house of
someone else.
709. Liability of Trespass to be borne: The person who commits
trespass shall bear the liability for the loss or damage caused
due to trespassing movable or immovable property of any one.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "trespass" means
unlawful entry into, taking possession of products, unauthorized
damage to, intervention in or unlawful encroachment on the
property that is under the entitlement, procession or ownership
of someone else in case of an immovable property; and forcibly
taking into custody, take away, to take the advantage arising out
of, or causing obstruction or hindrance in the use of the property
under the entitlement, possession or ownership of somebody else
in case of a movable property and the word also includes the act
of taking control of any type of movable or immovable property
in an unlawful manner.
710. Liability to be borne jointly: In case an act that is deemed as a
tort under this Chapter has been committed by more than one
person, each of the persons shall be jointly and severally liable
to the degree of the tort committed for the loss or damage
caused due to such an act.
711. Compensation to be paid for liability: (1) While bearing
liability for a tort committed under this Chapter, the person who
commits the tort shall have to pay compensation.
(2) The compensation shall be confined to the matter of actual
loss or damage and fictitious or unreal compensation shall not
be payable.
The compensation may be of any type in the form of cash,
kind or service.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, a claim of compensation may not be sustained in case
the loss or damage is caused due to a default, recklessness or
negligence of any other person or that of the victim’s own.
Provided that in case the other person causes loss or damage
because of his/her default, recklessness or negligence, it may not
cause hindrance to claim for compensation for such loss or
damage.
712. No
Liability
separate
provision:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, in case a
tort for which a liability is to be borne under this Chapter is
treated as criminal offence under a law or a separate provision
or provision of a separate legal remedy is made with regard to
such tort in this Code or other law, the liability under this
Chapter shall not be borne.
Subject to sub-Section (1), in case it is proved that the tort
for which liability is to be borne under this Chapter is not found
to be committed due to malafide intention, recklessness,
negligence, default or omission of the person who is said to have
committed such a tort, but it is committed for any other reason,
he/she shall be absolved from the liability to be borne for such
tort.
713. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of six months from
the date on which the cause of action arises.
Chapter – 18
Provisions Concerning Liability for Defective Products
714. To be Liable for Defective Products: (1) No person shall sell,
distribute, or cause to be sold or distributed any goods or service
having produced them defectively.
In case the sale or distribution of the product referred to in
sub-Section (1), causes a loss or damage to a body, life or
property of any one, the producer shall be liable for that under
this Chapter.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) "Defective Product" means a goods or service which
has not the minimum measures of safety that a common
person reasonably expects it to have while consuming
any product, for any of the following reasons:-
(1) Defective design, manufacturing, processing
or installation;
(2) Defective packing, protection or storage;
(3) Defective presentation;
(4) Lacking adequate measures or precautions to
control the potential risk or danger according
to nature of the produced goods or service, as
the case may be.
(b) "Producer" means the producer who finally produce,
sells and distribute the defective goods or service
and also includes the following persons:-
(1) The distribution or seller in case the producer
could not be traced out,
(2) In case of an imported goods, the importer
who imports defective goods or the distributor
or seller who sells or distributes such goods.
(c)"Goods" means an industrial product to be consumed
by public-in-general
715. Claimant to prove that Product is Defective: Whoever claims
that damage is cause to his/ her body, life or property due to
consumption of any goods or service for being defective, he/she
shall have to prove the relationship of such defective goods and
the damage in question and that the damage is caused only due
to consumption of such product.
716. To be relieved from liability: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 714, the producer shall not have to bear the
liability in case any of the following fact is proved:-
(a) He/she has not produced, imported, sold or distributed
the defective product;
(b) The goods or service he/she sold or distributed was not
defective at the time of sale or distribution or it became
defective after sale and distribution;
(c) The goods or service he/she has produced is not in sale
or distribution or not sold
(d) The loss is caused due to consumer's failure to comply
with the directives to be complied with while consuming
the produced goods or service;
(e) The loss is caused because the consumer has not properly
consumed the product in a manner which should not have
to be consumed;
(f) Absence of scientific or technical knowledge at the time
of production or distribution of the goods or service that
such goods or service was defective;
(g) While selling the product, from which the loss in caused,
it was informed that it may cause loss if it is not
consumed properly;
(h) In case any goods or service is consumed having the
knowledge or there being reasonable ground to have the
knowledge that it may cause loss or damage.
717. Degree of liability may be reduced: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in case it is proved that the
loss is caused due to the person producing the defective goods
and also due to the person who suffers from the loss both, the
liability of the producer may be reduced proportionally.
Provided that in case the third party suffers from the loss or
damage due to such loss, the degree of liability may not be
decreased in the case of such a party.
718. Products not deemed to be defective: Goods or service may
not be deemed to be defective only for the reason that the goods
or service of higher quality than the goods or service which a
person has consumed are available in the market.
719. No Adverse Effect on Other Rights: Nothing provided for in
this Chapter may cause an adverse effect on the right, interests
or claim available under a law or contract to the person who has
suffered from loss in body, life or property because of the
defective product.
720. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of one year from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Part -6
Provisions
Concerning Private
International Law

Part -6
Provisions Concerning Private International Law
721. Provision of this Chapter to Apply: (1) The provisions of this
Chapter shall apply on any matter relating to private legal
relationship involving a foreign element.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-Section (1), the
said provisions shall, particularly, apply on the following
matters:-
a) Legal status of a foreigner and his/her capacity;
b) Matters relating to marital relationship, paternal
and maternal and other family relationship or
partition of property, inheritance at least one of
the related parties of which is a foreigner or
matters relating to the activities concerning
thereto done in abroad;
c) Matters relating to movable or immovable
property located in abroad in which at least one
of the stakeholder parties is a foreigner;
d) Matters relating to right or liability concerning
contractual or non-contractual in which at least
one party is a foreigner; or
e) Matter relating to a contract concluded in abroad.
Explanation:
(1) “Foreign element” means a situation in
which a foreigner, foreign object or an act
carried out in abroad is involved.
(2) “Foreigner” means a foreign natural person
or corporate body and the word also
includes a foreign state.
722. Legal capacity of Foreigner to be Determined: (1) Legal
capacity of any foreigner shall be determined according to the
law of the country of citizenship of such person.
(2) In case citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to
sub-Section (1), his/her capacity shall be determined according
to the law of the country of his/her habitual residence, and
even if such residence could not be determined, according to
the law of the country where he/she is residing for the time
being.
(3) While determining legal capacity or legal status of any
corporate body, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country where it is registered, in case the country of
registration could not be ascertained, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where the Headquarters of
such a body is located and in case even such country could not
be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country where the place of transaction of such a body is
located.
723. Presumption of disappearance or death of a foreigner: (1) In
case a presumption of disappearance or death of a foreigner has
to be made, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of citizenship of such person.
(2) In case the citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to
sub-Section (1), it shall be determined according to the law of
the country of his/her habitual residence, and if such residence
could not be ascertained, according to the law of the country
where is his/her residence immediately before he/she is
disappeared or dead.
724. Successor to be determined according to foreign law: While
determining the successor in case property of a foreigner
residing in Nepal goes intestate, the successor shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his/her
citizenship, if such country could not be determined, it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his/her
habitual residence, and even if such residence could not be
ascertained, according to the law of the country where he/she is
residing for the time being.
725. Determination of Succession of Deceased: (1) In case the
succession is opened because of death of any foreigner in Nepal
and thereby a successor is to be determined for the property
located in Nepal, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country of citizenship at the time of death of such a person.
(2) In case the law could not be ascertained pursuant to sub Section (1), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his/her habitual residence at the time of his/her death,
and if even such residence could not be ascertained, it shall be
determined according to the Nepal law.
726. Testamentary Will to be determined according to the law of
the country of citizenship: (1) The capacity of conclude a
testamentary will to amend to and revoke it or form of such a
will shall be determined according to the law of the country of
citizenship of the person concluding such a will at the time of
concluding, amending to or revoking such will.
(2) If the citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to subsection (1), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of habitual residence and even if such law also could not
be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of
his/her residence for the time being.
727. Determination
Nature
Corporate
Body: While
determining whether a company, foundation or any other
corporate body is public or private entity, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where such a company,
foundation or corporate body has been incorporated and if such
a law could not be ascertained, it shall be determined according
to the law of the country where the registered office or
Headquarters of the company, foundation or corporate body is
located.
728. Regulation
Movable
Immovable
Property: (1)
Regulation of the succession to the movable property shall be
according to the law of the country of habitual residence of the
deceased at the time of his/her death.
(2) Regulation of the succession to the immovable property shall
be according to the law of the country where such property is
located.
729. Nepali Citizen to Follow Nepali Law while marrying in
abroad: (1) A Nepali citizen shall, while marrying in abroad,
have to meet the capacity, qualifications and conditions for
marrying as specified in the law of Nepal.
(2) The formality to be followed while solemnizing a marriage
pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall be according to the law of the
country where the marriage is solemnized.
Provided that while solemnizing a marriage at the Nepali
Embassy or Consular General Office in abroad, formality
according to the Nepal law shall be followed.
(2) The marriage solemnized in contravention of sub-Section (1)
or (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.
730. Foreigner to follow the terms and conditions of law of own
country: (1) While marrying in Nepal by foreigners or by a
foreigner and a Nepali citizen, every person entering into the
marriage shall have to abide by the conditions as to the capacity,
qualifications and other matters as set out in the laws of their
respective countries.
(2) The formality to be followed while solemnizing a marriage
in Nepal pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall be according to the
law of Nepal.
Provided that while solemnizing a marriage at foreign Embassy
or Consular General Office in Nepal, formality according to the
law of the concerned country shall be followed.
731. Consequences of Marriage to be according to law of one’s
own country: (1) The matrimonial relationship after the
marriage and the consequence of the marriage shall be
determined according to the law of the country, if both of them
belong to the same country and in case such country is different,
it shall be determined according to the law of the country of
their habitual residence and even if such a country is also
different, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of their residence for the time being.
(2) In case the consequence of the marriage could not be
ascertained pursuant to sub-Section (1), it shall be determined
according to the law of the country of their marriage.
732. Paternal Authority to be regulated by the law of the country
of citizenship: (1) The relationship between father, mother and
children including paternal authority shall be regulated by the
law of the country of citizenship of the children.
(2) In case the law referred to in sub-Section (1) is not
ascertained, it shall be regulated by the law of the country of
habitual residence of the parents and even if such law is not
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of their residence.
733. Relationship between the person adopting a child and
adopted child shall be according to law of the country of
citizenship: After adopting a son or daughter, the relationship
between the person adopting a son or daughter and the adopted
son or daughter shall be regulated by the law of the country of
citizenship of the person adopting a son or daughter; and if no
such law could be ascertained, according to the law of the
country of habitual residence of the person adopting a son or
daughter; even if such law could be ascertained, it shall be
determined according to the law of the country where they are
passing normal marital life.
734. Determination
Guardianship
Curatorship:
Guardianship or curatorship of a minor or person with unsound
mind shall be determined according to the law of the country of
citizenship of such a minor or person with unsound mind.
(2) In case the country referred to in sub-Section (1) could be
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his/her habitual residence and even if such country
could not be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the
law of the country of habitual residence for the time being.
(3) The relationship between a guardian or curator and the
person under the guardianship or curatorship as the case may be
shall be determined according to the law of the country of the
guardian and curator or where he/she is appointed as the
guardian or curator, as the case may be.
Provided that in case the habitual residence of the person under
the guardianship or curatorship is Nepal, it shall be determined
according to the Nepal law.
735. To determine on the basis of the law of the country of
residence: (1) While regulating the matters concerning
separation of bread and bed, it shall be regulated according to
the law of the country of habitual residence of the married
couple.
(2) While regulating the matter pursuant to sub-Section (1), in
case the country of habitual residence of the couple is different,
it shall be regulated according to the last country of their
habitual residence and in case even such country could not be
ascertained, it shall be regulated according to the law of the
country in a court of which the case of alimony is sub juice.
736. Dissolution of Marriage in Abroad to be recognized:
Dissolution of a marriage between Nepali citizens or between a
Nepali citizen and a foreigner effected in abroad shall be
recognized in Nepal in accordance with Nepal laws if such a
dissolution is made according to the law of the state where the
marriage is dissolved and such a dissolution may be enforced.
737. Content of ownership to be determined as per the law of the
country where property is located: (1) The content of
ownership or possession of movable or immovable property
shall be determined according to the law of the country where
such property is located.
(2) The situation leading to maintenance or end of ownership
over immovable property shall be determined according to the
law of the country where property is located.
738. Goods to be regulated according to law of destination: The
goods on transit in the course of transportation shall be
regulated by the law of the destination of such goods.
739. Law of Contract to be as determined by parties: (1) The
governing law of any contract shall be as determined in the
contract by the parties to it.
(2) In case no law is determined pursuant sub-Section (1), it
shall be governed by the law of the country where such a
contract is to be performed and even if such country could not
be ascertained, it shall be governed by the law of the country
where the contract has been concluded.
Provided that a contract concluded in Nepal shall be governed
by the law of Nepal.
740. Deed entered into in abroad to be recognized: The validity of
a contract or a deed concluded outside Nepal shall be
determined according to the law of the country in which it is
concluded and such a contract or a deed shall be deemed to be
lawful if it is duly concluded under the laws of the state where it
has been concluded and it shall be recognized in Nepal.
741. Regulation by the law of the country of donor: (1) The matter
of validity of a donation or gift shall be determined according to
the law of the country of citizenship of the donor at the time of
donation or gift.
(2) If formality has been completed according to the law of the
place of the country where donation or gift has been given, it
shall be regarded that donation or gift was duly given.
742. Determination of liability for Tort: (1) While determining
liability for an act which is deemed to be a tort according to the
law involving the foreign element, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where the act has been
committed.
(2) In case the act referred to in sub-Section (1) originated in
one country and the consequence of such act appears in another
country, the liability shall be determined according to the law of
the country where the consequence appears.
(3) In case no liability could be determined pursuant to sub Section (2), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country where the act to be regarded as tort has been committed.
743. Liability under Quasi-contract or unjust enrichment: The
liability under a quasi-contract or unjust enrichment shall be
determined according to the law of the country where such an
act has been happened.
744. Other matters to be determined according to private
international law: While determining any matter that is not
dealt with in this Chapter involving foreign element, it shall be
determined according to provisions of Nepal law if there is
separate provision with regard to such a matter and if no such
provision has been made, it shall be determined according to the
recognized principles of private international law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case all parties of the relevant subjects agree to determine the
matter referred to in sub-Section (1) according to Nepal law, it
may be determined according to such a law.
745. In case of double citizenship, law of habitual residence to
apply: (1) While determining the law as provided for in this
Chapter to determine according to the law of the country of
citizenship, if a person is having citizenship of two or more
countries at a time, his/her citizenship shall be determined
according to the law of the county of his/her habitual residence.
(2) In case such matter could not be determined according to the
law of the country referred to in sub-Section (1), it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of citizenship
having closest connection.
Provided that in case of person having Nepali citizenship or a
person having habitual residence in Nepal or a non-resident
Nepali citizen, it shall be determined according to the Nepal law.
(3) In case the reference of sub-Section (1) is with regard to a
refugee or a stateless person, it shall be determined according to
the law of the country of his/her habitual residence and in case
even such a law could not be determined, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country of his/her residence for the
time being.
746. Approval may be granted for proceedings of a case by a
Foreign Court: (1) If a case which is under consideration of a
court of Nepal, the parties of which are foreigners, if both
parties of such a case submit a joint petition to the court
specifying reasons that it would be appropriate and practicable
for that case to be resolved by a foreign court of the residence to
which the parties belong, and in case it is found reasonable upon
an inquiry on the petition, the court may grant approval to
initiate proceedings of the case by the foreign court according to
the demand of the parties to the case.
(2) Once an approval is given with regard to a case by the court
pursuant to sub-Section (1) to initiate proceedings by a foreign
court, no proceedings shall be adjudicated again by a court of
Nepal in the same matter.
747. Case filed in a court of Nepal may be suspended: In a case
where foreigners are parties and which is under consideration by
a court of Nepal and in case the parties of the case submit a
petition requesting for suspending proceedings of the case
because judgment in the case by the court of Nepal is likely to
have direct impact in the decision of the case pending at the
other country, the court may suspend the proceedings of such a
case until the case between them pending in abroad is decided.
748. Court of Nepal to Have Jurisdiction: A court of Nepal shall
have the jurisdiction to adjudicate proceedings and to decide a
case in any dispute arising out of the following matters:-
A matter between the foreigners who reside within
Nepal or between a foreigner and a Nepali citizen
that is related under this Code or other law;
A matter in regard to a case when a foreigner
residing in Nepal is a defendant;
A matter in regard to the succession of a foreigner
who resides in Nepal having property at the time of
death;
A matter concerning payment to be made within
Nepal in a financial transaction or deal made in
abroad between a Nepali citizen and a foreigner;
A matter concerning property that is located in
Nepal between foreigners or a foreigner and a Nepali
citizen;
A matter concerning a contract concluded in or to be
performed in Nepal between foreigners or to which
at least one party is a Nepali citizen;
A matter concerning tort, quasi-contract or unjust
enrichment committed outside Nepal where both
parties or the opposite party are Nepali citizens or
foreigners who have habitual residence in Nepal;
A matter to be adjudicated by a court of Nepal under

Section 721.
749. Other matters concerning case may also be heard by the
court of Nepal: In any case in which the principal dispute
involving a foreigner to be resolved by a court of Nepal is being
heard under its jurisdiction, if it seems that other matters
concerning the case have also to be resolved, the court may
resolve the matter accepting its jurisdiction in such matters as
well.
750. To be according to Treaty: In case otherwise provided for on
any matter dealt with in this Chapter in a treaty to which Nepal
is a party, nothing provided for in this Chapter shall have any
affect on that matter.
751. Not applicable if against public order: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in case it becomes
against public order while implementing any of the provisions
referred to in this Chapter, in such circumstance, the provisions
of this Chapter shall not be applicable.
(2) In case a circumstance arises as referred to in sub-Section
(1), the matters referred to in this Chapter shall be regulated
according to other linking criteria and if no such criteria could
be determined, such matters shall be regulated according to the
Nepal law.
Annex-2
THE CIVIL
PROCEDURES
A Bill Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Civil
Procedures
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make the civil procedure simplified
and timely, by amending and consolidating the prevailing laws relating to
procedures on filing, proceedings, hearing and settlement of civil cases, and
other procedures pertaining thereto, and the execution of decisions made on
such cases,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Constituent Assembly pursuant to
clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"Civil Procedure Code, 2010"
This Code shall commence on the fourteenth day of the
month of April of the year 2011.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Code:
"Court" means the Supreme Court, Appellate Court or District
Court, and also includes any other judicial body or authority
empowered by law to try and settle civil cases of any specific
type.
"Law" means the law in force for the time being;
"Endorsement" means an order made by the concerned officer
of the court on the reverse side or any other part of a document
or on a separate paper, that cannot be filed pursuant to law,
setting out the grounds and reasons for not filing the document
and putting his/her signature thereon.
"Civil case" means a case relating to a legal right, status,
position, family relation and property, other than a case defined
by law as a criminal case, and also includes a case on any of the
following matters:
matters relating to establishment relationship or divorce,
matters relating to fees, remuneration, salary, allowance,
wages, compensation,
matters relating to partition, succession, donation and gift,
testamentary will, guardian, curator, maternal and
paternal authority, adoption,
matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
under any contract, quasi-contract or unjust enrichment,
matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
relating to tort, quasi-tort or defective product,
matters relating to servitudes,
Matters relating to any other right or liability of civil
nature.
"Judge" means an authority of the court who tries, hears and
settles a case, and also includes the authority competent to try,
hear and settle any specific type of civil cases.
"Memorandum of appeal" means a petition, accompanied by
own pleas, made by a person who is not satisfied with a
decision of the lower court to the higher court for the correction
of such a decision.
"Statement of defense" means a written statement admitting or
rebutting the claims set forth in the plaint and submitted to the
court, and also includes deposition equivalent to the statement
of defense.
"Counterclaim" means a claim made by a defendant on the
claim made by a plaintiff.
"Defendant" means a person who submits a statement of
defense, and also includes a person who makes a deposition as
if he/she were a defendant or a person who has been set by the
court as a defendant.
"Plaint" means a complaint, suit, claim or petition praying for
the establishment of one's right, interest or concern on any
matter or the execution of one claim, and also includes a
deposition equivalent to a plaint or a counterclaim set forth in
the statement of defense.
"Case-file" means a file that records a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and proofs and
evidence and other documents as collected.
"Case" means a civil case.
"Summons" means a notice or summons issued by a court in the
name of any person in the course of proceedings on a case.
"Plaintiff" means a person who makes a plaint and also includes
a person who submits a counter-claim, as well.
"Local body" means the village development committee or
municipality, as the case may be.
"Property" means a movable or immovable property.
Matters set forth in separate law not to be affected: (1) The
provisions set forth in several procedural laws made on several
matters shall govern such matters, and nothing contained in this Code
shall affect such matters.
This Code shall apply to the procedures not set forth in
the laws as referred to in sub-section (1).

Chapter-2
General Principles of Civil Procedure Code
Principles to be followed in civil cases: In trying, hearing and
adjudicating, the courts shall generally follow the principles and
provisions set forth in this Chapter.
Hearing to be held in open bench: Except as otherwise provided for
in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court on a petition by a
party of a case, cases shall be tried, heard and adjudicated in open
bench.
Hearing to be held by competent court: A case shall be tried, heard
and adjudicated by a competent court in accordance with law.
Question of entitlement to be adjudicated by court only: If there
arises a question of entitlement or disentitlement on any matter, such a
question shall be settled by a regular court only.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Code, the expression
"regular court" means the District Court, Appellate Court or Supreme
Court.
Dispute relating to legal status to be settled by court: (1) A dispute
relating to settlement of relationship, divorce or legal status of any
person shall be adjudicated by the regular court only.
If it appears, in the course of proceedings of a case, that
the other matters should be tried, heard and adjudicated only after the
settlement of the question of entitlement, and a case is sub judice in
any other court or body, the court shall order the parties to obtain
settlement of the question of entitlement from the regular court.
Status of parties to be equal: (1) In trying, hearing and adjudicating
a case, the status of parties to the case shall equal.
The court shall treat each party equally.
If, in the course of proceedings of a case, the
Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person is present
before the court as a plaintiff or defendant, except as otherwise
provided for in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court, the
Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person may not
claim any separate status, facility, concession, immunity or exemption,
in the course of proceedings of cases.
Locus standi to make plaint: A person who desires to make a claim
by filing a plaint in any court, the person shall show his/her locus
standi by mentioning in the plaint the matter that he/she has right to
make such a claim or demand or has legitimate interest or concern
therein or therewith.
Jurisdiction not to be in vacuum: (1) A court or judicial authority as
specified by law to try, hear and adjudicate any case shall have the
jurisdiction to try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
If no court is specified to have jurisdiction pursuant to
sub-section (1), the concerned district court shall be deemed to have
jurisdiction to originally try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
Prohibition on avoidance of decision making: (1) A judge shall
avoid making decision on the ground that law is inadequate or unclear.
In the event of occurrence of the circumstance as referred
to in sub-section (1), decision shall have to be made based on
recognized principles of law and justice.
Opportunity to be given for compromise or mediation: (1) Prior to
passing a judgment on any case, the court shall have to give
opportunity to the parties to compromise such a case or enter into a
compromise by following the procedures of mediation.
If, in giving opportunity pursuant to sub-section (1), if
the parties agree to enter into compromise or undergo the procedures
of mediation, the case shall be capable of being settled through
compromise or mediation, irrespective of the level trying the case.
Principle of res judicata to be followed: In hearing and adjudging a
case, the same court shall not make hearing and pass a judgment more
than once in the case on the same matter involving the same plaintiff
and same defendant.
Right of appeal: Where any case has been originally tried, heard and
adjudged, a party who is not satisfied with such a judgment shall have
the right to make an appeal against such a judgment to the appeal
hearing court from the court that has made such a judgment, in
accordance with law.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction to be specified: (1) In order to try, hear and adjudicate a
case, the court shall have jurisdiction to that effect pursuant to law.
Any proceeding, hearing or adjudication made in the
course of a case by a court without jurisdiction shall be void.
In passing a verdict, the court shall have to specify in the
judgment the matter of under which law it has jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction of court: The court shall have powers, as provided for in
law, to try, hear and settle cases, hear appeals therefrom, revise or
review them.
District court to have jurisdiction: (1) In relation to the cases
relating to any immovable property, to servitudes, ditches and borders,
requiring an on-site examination or inquiry by the nature of the
subject-matters of cases and any cases requiring the examination of
any land, house or place in view of plaints, the district court of the
district where such land or house is located shall have jurisdiction to
try, hear and settle such cases.
The concerned district court shall also try, hear and
adjudicate the following matters, in addition to the cases set forth in
sub-section (1):
A case involving the question of rent, crop or amount in
question or relating to the ownership, possession of or
entitlement, disentitlement to a property,
A case relating to attachment to or preemption of an
immovable property,
Division of an immovable property,
A case relating to furnishing an immovable property in
security, mortgaging, possessing and foreclosing such
property,
A case relating to any concern or condition on an
immovable property,
A case relating to compensation related with an
immovable property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), a partition case shall be tried, heard and settled by the district
court of the district where the defendant is residing.
District court of district where defendant resides or act done to
have jurisdiction: (1)
Any case other than those set forth in

Section 18 shall be tried, heard and settled by the district court in
which plaint is filed, out of the district court of the district where the
act is done or the district court of the district where the defendant
resides.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"district where the defendant resides" means the district where the
defendant has abode and also includes, in the case of a legal person,
the district where the head office of such a person is situate.
If both plaintiff and defendant do any general transaction
in any place within Nepal, other than the territory where the plaintiff
and the defendant reside, a case relating to such transaction shall be
tried, heard and adjudicated by the district court in which plaint is
filed, out of the district court in the territory where the transaction has
been done or the district court in the territory where the plaintiff
resides.
In filing a case of the matter as referred to in sub-section
(1), if there are two or more defendants, the case shall be filed in the
district court of the district where more defendants reside.
Provided that where the number of defendants residing in more
than one district is equal, the plaint may be filed in any district court
of the district where such defendants reside.
Jurisdiction over cases relating to transaction carried on abroad:
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 18 and 19, where
there a provision that a case on the matter of general transaction or
contract done or concluded abroad may be filed in any court in Nepal,
the district court of the district where the plaintiff or the defendant
resides shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Jurisdiction over transaction done abroad Nepalese aircraft and
ship: The court of Nepal shall, subject to Section 20, have jurisdiction
to try, hear and adjudicate a case on any transaction done abroad a
Nepalese aircraft or ship, registered in Nepal in accordance with law,
while such an aircraft or ship is outside Nepal.
Higher court to have jurisdiction: If a case is filed in both lower and
higher courts on any matter falling under the jurisdiction of the lower
court and the higher court pursuant to law, the higher court shall have
the jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Court to have jurisdiction: If a case of any matter is filed in both a
court and other quasi-judicial body in accordance with law, the court
shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Jurisdiction over case in which public servant is plaintiff or
defendant: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, while lodging a plaint by a public servant in his/her official
capacity or by a person against a public servant in such capacity, such
a plaint shall be lodged in the district court of the district where the
office in which such a public servant is in service for the time being.
In making a plaint or submitting a statement of defense
by a public servant in his/her personal capacity, the public servant
may, in fulfillment of the requirements of laws in force, make or
submit the same to the district court of the district where he/she in
service.
The court shall file a plaint or statement of defense
tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section (2) and forward the same to
the concerned district court.
The concerned court shall try, hear and settle the case
forwarded pursuant to sub-section (3), in accordance with law.
Concerned district court to have jurisdiction: Where any court is
not specified by law to have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle any
case, the concerned district court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear
and settle such case.
Plaint to be maintained in one court only: (1) If a person has filed
several plaints on the same matter in several courts, the case shall be
maintained in any one district court with the consent of both parties of
the case, and information thereof shall be given to the rest courts.
If information is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
courts shall annul such plaints.
If the parties fail to agree pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint which has been filed earlier in the court shall be maintained,
and the plaints filed in the other courts shall be annulled.
Jurisdiction of court hearing appeal: If a case is filed in, and tried,
heard and settled by, any court in accordance with this Chapter, the
court hearing appeals against the orders or judgments made by such a
court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle appeals, as provided
for in law.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Preparation of Deeds
Requirement to be met in preparing deeds: (1) In
preparing
deed, it shall be so prepared, clearly setting out the matter on which it
has to be prepared, by printing, typing or hand writing that it does not
contain any errors and overwriting and cross-out and it has to be
signed by the actor or authority concerned with that deed.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
The expression "deed" means any of the following deeds:
A deed on any kind of general transaction carried
on household, transfer of a movable or immovable
property or on mortgage or pledge of a property,
A contract,
A deed of authorization, power of attorney, deed of
consent or other paper of similar nature,
Any deed to be submitted to a government office
or corporate body,
Any kind of deed, including a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and
petition, to be submitted to the court,
Any deed to be issued by a government office or
corporate body,
Any other deed of similar nature.
The term "actor" means a person who has responsibility
by the contents of a deed to sign the deed.
The term "government office" means a court, office of
the Government of Nepal, constitutional body, an office
receiving or involving budget or grant from the
Government of Nepal, or a local body.
The expression "corporate body" means a body and
company that is fully or partly owned by the Government
of Nepal, and includes a university and community
school.
If, in preparing a deed as referred to in sub-section (1), an
error is made or contents are to be corrected for any reason, correction
shall be made by so crossing out the sentence, word, figure or letter
that has to be corrected that such a sentence, word, figure or letter
seems to have been otherwise and writing such a sentence, word,
figure or letter as required to have been mentioned over or under the
cross-out, and the concerned actor shall sign each place where such
correction is made.
If correction cannot be made by way of cross-out
pursuant to sub-section (2) or despite that such correction can be made,
the corrected content would create confusion or doubt, another
separate deed shall be prepared instead of such a deed.
In setting down any amount in a deed as referred to in
sub-section (1), the amount shall be set down in both figures and
words.
If, in setting down any amount pursuant to sub-section
(4), there is a difference between the figures and the words, the
contents set down in the words shall be valid.
Requirements to be met while signing deeds: (1) In signing a deed
or causing it to be signed, a person who can write shall write his/her
name and sign it, and a person who cannot write shall put his/her
thumb impressions on it.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
signing any of the following deeds, a person who can write shall put
both of his/her signature and thumb impression on it and a person who
cannot write shall put thumb impressions on it and make signature in
such a manner as to prove that such a deed has been executed and
signed by the actor:
A deed related with the transfer of title to, gift, donation,
pledge or mortgage of, a movable or immovable property,
Power of attorney/authorization letter to be submitted to
a government body or body corporate,
A deed of partition, will, exchange to be executed
between coparceners,
A deed of separation of bed and board or joining of bed
and board to be executed between coparceners,
A deed relating to adoption,
A separate receipt executed upon receiving repayment of
loan, without making an endorsement on the reverse side
of a bond,
A deed of loan, pledge, mortgage and also sub-mortgage,
deed of term of repayment, guarantee letter and bond,
Bailment contract,
Unsecured bond (Kapali).
In signing, pursuant to sub-section (1), a deed to be
issued by a government office or corporate body shall be signed by
the concerned authority indicating his/her name and designation, and
such a deed shall also contain the date of its issued.
Requirements to be met while putting signature on deeds: (1) A
person who can write shall have to write his/her full name, surname
and address in a deed, and sign the deed.
In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), the other
places may be initialed by putting the full signature on the principal
pace of signature.
In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), if a deed
of the same matter contains more than one page, the actor shall be
required to sign it shall so initial the top and bottom of each page that
no content can be added to or deleted from the deed and put the full
signature on the principal place of signature.
If any deed is affixed or joined, the actor shall initial each
joint and place of such affixation or joint.
Requirements to be met while putting or causing to be put finger
impressions on deeds: (1) In putting or causing to be put finger
impressions on a deed, the person putting finger impressions on the
deed shall put impressions of the thumb in his/her right hand on the
deed.
In putting or causing to be put finger impressions
pursuant to sub-section (1), if the person putting finger impressions
has no thumb in the right hand or despite having such a thumb, the
wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear, the person
shall put the impression of thumb in the left hand, if the person has no
thumb in both hands or despite having them, the wheel like and conch
like marking therein are not clear, the person shall put impression of
another figure having clear marking, in the right or left hand, on the
deed, setting out the same reason.
In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs in
both hands in accordance with law, if the actor has no thumb of any
hand or the conch like marking therein are not clear, the actor shall
put impression of such another finger in the same hand as having clear
marking and the thumb of the hand, in which wheel like and conch
like marking therein are clear.
In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs of
both hands, the actor shall put the impression of any one such figure
each in the both hands as in which the wheel like marking and conch
like marking are clear if the actor has no thumb in both hands or
despite have the same, the wheel like marking and conch like marking
therein are not clear.
In putting, or causing to be put, finger impressions
pursuant to sub-section (4), if one hand has no figure at all or despite
have any figure, the wheel like marking and conch like marking are
not clear, the impression of any such one or two fingers, as required,
in the same hand as wheel like marking and conch like marking in
which are clear shall be put, or caused to be put, on the deed.
Except where the impression of any one thumb or both
thumbs is caused to be put while putting, or causing to be put, thumb
impressions pursuant to this Section, in putting, or causing to be put,
the impression of any other figure, the matter that the impression of
other figure has been put or caused to be put for the reason that the
actor has no such a thumb or the wheel like and conch like marking
therein have not appeared clear shall be set down in the concerned
deed.
Signature to be put: If in relation to a deed on which the impressions
of the thumbs of both hands and signature of the actor who is to put
thumb impression have to be put or on which the finger impressions
and signature of the actor have to be put in accordance with law, the
finger impressions cannot be put on the deed owing to the
circumstance set forth in Section 31, and the actor can make signature
in writing, the actor shall put or cause to be put only his signature in
writing on the deed, and the deed shall contain the matter that figure
impression could not be put on the deed for the reason that the actor
has no figure in both hands or despite having one, the wheel like and
conch like marking therein are not clear.
Deed to be valid: Where a deed is signed or on which finger
impression is put on it, such a deed shall be valid for any purpose and
enforced in accordance with law.
Deed to be caused to be signed by guardian or curator: (1) In
signing a deed or causing it to be signed by an actor in accordance
with law, if the actor is not able to make signature pursuant to Section
30 and, in putting or causing to be put figure impressions on the deed
pursuant to Section 31, the actor has no figure in both hands or despite
having one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not
clear, a person who can be a guardian or curator of such an actor shall
put signature on the deed on behalf of, and in the presence of, that
actor in accordance with law.
In signing or sealing a deed or causing it to be signed
through a person who can be a guardian or curator pursuant to subsection (1), the deed shall contain the matter that the guardian or
curator has signed it on behalf of, and in the presence of, that actor for
the reason that the actor has no figure in both hands or despite having
one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear.
Procedures to be fulfilled in executing deed by person who is not
able to seal it: (1) If a person who is not able to seal a deed by
putting finger impressions on it for the reason that he/she has no
finger in both hands can make signature, the deed certifying authority
shall cause him/her to put his/her signature only on the deed and
certify the deed, stating that mater in any part of the top of the deed.
In executing a deed by a person who is not able to seal
the deed by putting on it the figure impression by the reason that
he/she has no finger in both hands and who is not also able to make
signature, the deed shall be certified, in witness of his/her wife or
husband living in an undivided family and, failing such a person, in
witness of the guardian or a person who has the first and foremost
right in the order of priority to inherit him/her, setting down in it the
reason which the figure impression and signature of the deed
executing person have not been put on it.
Requirements to be met in executing deed on behalf of persons of
special group: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, in executing a deed on behalf of a blind or dumb, it shall
be executed in presence and witness of a person who can be his/her
guardian living in an undivided family or failing such a guardian, a
person who can be his/her curator, stating that the deed corresponds to
what has been expressed or gestured by such a blind or dumb.
In submitting any deed to a government office or
corporate body or preparing deeds such as a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal or petition, such a deed shall be filed
or submitted, by getting it certified to that effect by the chief of the
office or body to which such a deed is to be produced or by a person
authorized by the chief to that effect.
Identification details to be set down: (1) In preparing the deeds
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deeds shall be
prepared clearly setting down the identification details of the main
actors related with the deeds.
In setting down the identification pursuant to sub-section
(1), there shall be set down the three-generation details of the
concerned person, namely his/her father's, mother's, grand-father's and
grand-father's name, his/her wife's or husband's name, his/her
citizenship number, age, date and district of issue of the citizenship
certificate, his/her permanent address, and in the case of such a person
being a foreign citizen, details of his/her citizenship, his/her passport
number, country of issued of passport and date of issue of passport,
his/her address and email address.
In executing a deed in presence of a guardian or curator
pursuant to this Chapter, there shall be set down in the deed the
guardian's or curator's name, surname, address, citizenship number,
and in the case of such a guardian or curator being a foreign citizen,
his/her passport number and email address.
Details of body corporate to be mentioned: (1) In executing or
causing to be executed any deed on behalf of a body corporate, the
deed shall mention details clearly identifying such a body, its
registration number or place of registered or head office and shall be
signed, or cause to be signed, by the person authorized to that effect
by a resolution of the directors thereof.
In getting the deed to be signed pursuant to sub-section
(1), the person to sign the deed on behalf of such a body shall not be
required to put finger impression on the deed.
Provided that upon the deed being signed, the seal of such a
body shall be affixed thereunto.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of

Section 29, in the case of a deed of which a body corporate is the actor,
it shall not be required to mention the description of three-generation.
Only signature to be sufficient: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, in signing any deed by any public officebearer in that capacity, by an office-bearer of a body corporate in that
capacity, in preparing a report of any study, or research, examination
or inquiry or signing or sealing any deed other than a deed required by
law to bear finger impressions, the finger impressions shall not be
required to be put thereon, and if the deed is duly signed by the
concerned person, such a deed shall be deemed to have been duly
executed.
Seal to be put in indelible ink: (1)
In putting or causing to be put
finger impressions pursuant to this Chapter, the wheel like or conch
like figure shall be colored in indelible ink or otherwise and shall be
impressed on the deed.
In putting signature by a person required to make it, the
person shall put the same in indelible ink.
Place and date to be set down while preparing deed: In preparing a
deed as referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deed shall
contain the main contents thereof and state at the end the place and
date of execution of such a deed.
Deed to be witnessed: (1) A deed required to be prepared in witness
of persons pursuant to law shall be prepared in witness of at least two
persons who are competent to enter into a contract and state that the
act, transaction as referred to in the deed have been carried out.
A deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall state the
details setting out the identity and address of witnesses as mentioned
in sub-section (1) and be signed or sealed, or caused to be signed or
sealed, pursuant to this Chapter.
If a deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter has been
written by the actor himself or herself, the deed shall state that matter
and if it has been drafted by another person, it shall state that matter
and signed by the writer, indicating his/her identity.
If any license has to be obtained in accordance with law
in order to prepare a deed, the writer preparing the draft pursuant to
sub-section (3) shall also state the details thereof.
Deed failing to meet requirements to be invalid: (1) A deed
prepared without fulfillment of the requirements pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be valid, and no right, claim, interest or concern of
any person shall be enforced by such a deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
deed may be recognized in the following circumstance by imposing a
fine not exceeding two hundred rupees in view of the nature of the
deed.
Where a person who can write has not put finger
impression but has put signature duly or where the person
has put finger impression but the impression is not
legible,
Where a person who can write has not put signature but
has put finger impression only,
Where the deed at its end containing the date is not
signed or sealed by the actor,
Where a deed is not witnessed or despite being witnessed,
it does not bear the signature of the witness,
Where the name, surname, address and designation have
to be set down, any or all of the surname, address and
designation has or have been omitted.
Deed executed by actor to be valid: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is proved that a deed
required to be signed by the actor has been hand written by the actor
himself or herself, such a deed shall be valid in accordance with law.
Deed may be registered upon making addition legibly: (1) If some
addition and cross-out is made and contents added in legible manner
in a deed tendered for registration in a government office or body
corporate, in getting it to the signed, there shall be made a remark in
the deed that such addition and cross out have been made or letters
added therein and certified to that effect and then the deed shall be
registered.
In the case of a deed written by a government office or
body corporate and tendered for registration, the chief of such office
or body or the person authorized by the chief may sign it and register
If any deed does not meet the requirements pursuant to
sub-section (1) or (2) and cannot be registered, the chief of office or
body shall, for the reasons why the deed cannot be registered to be
clearly recorded, write such reasons on the reverse side of the deed,
date and sign it and return it, by getting a receipt from the person
tendering it for registration.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no document registered or filed in a government office or
body corporate shall be returned to any one nor shall it be exchanged
nor shall any figure, letter be deleted, crossed out or altered.
Copies of deeds to be provided: (1) If any person who has concern
in a case or his/her law practitioner makes a petition for a copy of a
document contained in the case-file including the plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition, deed related with the
evidence produced by the plaintiff or the defendant and the judgment,
the court shall provide it as soon as possible.
Provided that any law practitioner may obtain a copy of a
judgment.
Except as provided for in sub-section (1), any person
who is concerned with any deed maintained with a government office
or body corporate may make a petition, setting out the matter that the
person is concerned with the deed, to the concerned government
office or body corporate for a copy of the deed.
In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
there shall be charged the fees of five rupees per page of A-4 size
where the concerned person himself or herself has copied a deed or
made a photocopy of the same and the fees of ten rupees per page of
A-4 size where the court or other government office or body corporate
has itself made a copy and provided it.
In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (3), the
matter that the copy has been provided at the request of the person
who has applied for the same and the copy corresponds to the original
shall be mentioned on the first page of the copy and the copy shall be
certified by the competent authority.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the concerned court, government office or body corporate
shall not be compelled to provide the copy of a deed that has to be
kept confidential or that has not to be made public pursuant to law or
that has been ordered by a court not to be made public.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Limitation
Plaint to be made within limitation: (1)
If any certain period of
time is specified by law to make a plaint in, or submit any kind of
claim, to any court on any matter, such a period of time shall be
deemed to be a limitation.
Where the limitation is provided for pursuant to subsection (1), a plaint shall be made within such a limitation.
If any person shows up in the court to make a plaint in
contravention of sub-section (2), his/her plaint shall not be filed, and
even if such a plaint happens to have been filed for any reason, such a
plaint shall be annulled.
Plaint may be made failing provision of limitation: If no limitation
is provided by law for the filing of a plaint on any matter, a plaint may
be made within six months after the date of occurrence of the cause of
action.
Commencement of limitation: (1) If there arises a circumstance to
make a plaint on any case, the limitation shall be deemed to have
commenced in accordance with that law which provides for limitation.
If there is no legal provision in relation to the
commencement of limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
limitation shall be deemed to have commenced from the date on
which the cause of action has arisen.
Plaint may be made from the date of knowledge: (1) Where a plaint
has to be made as a result of deception, forgery, fraud or conspiracy or
for similar other reason or the limitation gets expired in a
circumstance where any act is done clandestinely and it is not thus
known then, and the concerned person shows up to make a plaint
setting out that matter within thirty five days after the date of
knowledge of that matter by him/her, the court shall file and try such a
plaint subject to this Chapter, Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section 48 or 49.
In the case of a plaint to be made by the Government of
Nepal or any body corporate for the purpose of sub-section (1), the
date of knowledge by the concerned office or body corporate shall be
deemed to be the date of knowledge by the plaintiff.
Plaintiff may be filed after leave: (1) If the deadline of limitation
falls on a public holiday and a plaint is tendered for filing on the first
day on which the court opens immediately after such a holiday, the
court shall file the plaint.
If a plaint is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
shall be deemed to have been filed within the limitation.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "public
holiday" means the holiday for whole or half day as notified as such
by the Government of Nepal that the government offices or courts
remain closed on such a day.
Limitation of minor or person of unsound mind: (1) If any person
who has to make a plaint is a minor, the limitation shall be deemed to
have commenced in his/her case from the day on which he/she attains
majority.
If any person who has to make a plaint becomes of
unsound of mind prior to the commencement of limitation, the
limitation shall be deemed to have commenced in his/her case from
the day on which he/she becomes of sound mind.
If any person becomes of unsound mind after the
commencement of limitation, if the person makes a plaint within the
period of limitation that remains after deduction of the period during
which he/she becomes of unsound mind, the plaint shall be deemed to
have been made within the limitation.
Provided that the period of limitation that remains after the
person who was of unsound mind has become of sound mind is less
than fifteen days, the period of fifteen days shall be deemed to be the
remaining term of limitation.
Commencement of limitation of heir: (1) If a minor or a person of
unsound mind who is to file a plaint dies before the minor becomes
major or the person becomes of sound mind, his/her heir may make
the plaint within the limitation from the date on which he/she dies.
If a minor becomes major and then dies, his/her heir may
make a plaint within the remaining period of limitation when the
remaining period of limitation is thirty five days or more, and within
thirty five days if he/she dies when the remaining period of limitation
is less than thirty five days.
If a person of unsound mind becomes of sound mind and
then dies, his/her heir may make a plaint within the remaining period
of limitation when the remaining period of limitation is thirty five
days or more, and within thirty five days if he/she dies when the
remaining period of limitation is less than thirty five days.
Plaint by guardian: Notwithstanding anything contained in Section
52 or 53, if there is a guardian of a minor or a person of unsound mind,
as provided for in law, the guardian may make a plaint within the
limitation as referred to in this Chapter.
Limitation not to be postponed: Notwithstanding that any of the
persons who are to make a plaint jointly is a minor or a person of
unsound mind, the limitation shall not be postponed in the case of the
other persons.
Provided that such a minor or person of unsound mind may
make a separate plaint subject to Section 53 after he/she becomes a
major or a person of sound mind.
Limitation in relation to transaction carried on abroad: If there is
a provision in law or contract that a plaint may be made in any court
of Nepal in relation to any act, action or transaction done or taken in a
foreign country, such a plaint may be made subject to this Chapter as
if such an act, action or transaction were done or taken within Nepal.
Limitation of plaint lodged in court without jurisdiction: If any
person lodges a plaint in any court in accordance with law, it appears
from the statement of defense submitted by the defendant or otherwise
that the court has no jurisdiction to make decision on such a plaint, the
limitation for lodging a plaint by the concerned person shall be
deemed to have commenced from the date on which such a court ends
the proceeding thereon.
Provided that,
Where the court has made a endorsement at the time of
lodging a plaint that it has no jurisdiction, the limitation
for lodging plaint pursuant to this Section shall not be
extended by the reason only that the court without
jurisdiction has proceeded with,
After the court in which a case has been filed knows that
it has no jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case,
nothing shall be deed to preclude, merely by the reason
that such a court has not settled the plaint, the concerned
person from lodging a plaint in the competent court
within the limitation as provided in law,
Where a plaint is made, lying as to the limitation, after
the expiration of the limitation in accordance with law,
the jurisdiction cannot be established merely by the
reason that the plaint has been filed.
Limitation not to be expired: If the limitation has expired with a
person being unable to file a plaint within the limitation owing to the
existence of the following force majeure event (circumstance beyond
control) and the concerned party tenders a plaint for filing within the
following period, setting out that matter, the court shall,
notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, file and
proceed with such a plaint, subject to Section 59:
If the concerned person himself or herself has to observe
obsequies by the reason of someone's death, seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
completion of obsequies,
If the concerned person is a woman has delivered a child,
thirty days, excluding the time required for journey, after
the date of delivery,
If motor vehicles have not plied because the route has
remained closed because of flood, landslide and snowfall or declaration of curfew or otherwise, ten days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
resumption of such a route or movement of motor
vehicles,
If the concerned person has been abducted or taken
hostage by another person, seven days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of release from
such abduction or hostage taking,
If a divine or natural calamity such as earthquake has
occurred, ten days, excluding the time required for
journey, after the date of occurrence thereof.
Evidence of reason for expiration of limitation to be submitted:
In making a plaint pursuant to Section 50 or 58, the reason for
being unable to make the plaint within the limitation shall be set out in
the plaint or in a separate petition, and such proof or evidence as
required to prove the same shall also be produced.
If a person who is not able to produce a proof or evidence
of the reason why the person has not been able to lodge a plaint within
the limitation at the time of making plaint pursuant to sub-section (1)
makes a request for a time-limit for the production of such a proof or
evidence, the court may give such a time-limit as it deems appropriate,
but not exceeding twenty one days after the date of filing of the plaint,
for the production of such a proof or evidence.
Limitation to commence from date of approval: If any law
provided that approval of any one has to be obtained in accordance
with law prior to making a plaint against any person, organization or
office-bearer, the limitation for making a plaint by the concerned
person on that matter shall be deemed to commence from the date of
notice of such approval received by that person.
Limitation not to be computed pending specification of authority:
If the Government of Nepal or any other body or office-bearer has
authority to specify the authority, court or body to adjudicate a case
under any law and if such authority, court or body is specified within
the limitation, a plaint has to be lodged accordingly, and if such an
authority, court or body is not so specified, a plaint has to be lodged
within a period of fifteen days, under the relevant law, after the date
of specification of such an authority, court or body.
Computing of period of limitation: (1) If the period of limitation is
specified on day counting basis, the number of days so specified shall
be computed on the day counting basis.
In computing days pursuant to sub-section (1), the period
of limitation shall be fixed by reckoning days from the following day
of the day of commencement of limitation.
If the period of limitation is specified in months, the
number of months as so specified shall be reckoned on the basis of the
first day of months irrespective of the days making months.
If the period of limitation is specified in years, the
number of years as so specified shall be reckoned treating a period of
twelve months as one year.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Court Fees
Payment of court fees: (1) In lodging a plaint or memorandum of
appeal to the court and making a counterclaim in the court, the court
fees shall be charged.
Except in the case referred to in sub-section (1), if an
order is made to make a review or revision on a petition made for the
review or revision of any case, the court fees shall be paid for the
review or revision of the case, as the case may be.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "court
fees" means the fees to be charged while lodging a plaint or
memorandum of appeal or a petition for the review or revision of a
case, and includes the fees payable by a person who makes a counterclaim.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), no court fees shall be charged pursuant to this Chapter in the case
of a case in which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a case to
be heard and adjudicated by a local body in accordance with law or
proceeding to be carried out by a body specified by the Government
of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal gazette.
Case not to be heard without payment of court fees: (1) No person
may lodge a plaint, memorandum of appeal or make counterclaim or
petition for the review or revision of any case without payment of the
court fees charged pursuant to this Chapter nor shall such a plaint,
appeal or petition be entertained.
Except as mentioned elsewhere in this Chapter, a plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition for the review or revision of a case
without payment of the court fees shall be dismissed.
Cases may be heard without collection of court fees: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 64, in the following
circumstance, the judge may, by executing a memorandum with the
reasons, make an order to file a plaint, memorandum of appeal,
counterclaim or review or revise a case, subject to the collection of the
court fees later fully or partly:
If a person who is required to pay the court fees makes a
petition specifying the reason that he/she is not able to
pay the chargeable court fees fully or partly because of
being extremely indigent and the judge has any
reasonable ground to believe that matter,
If it is recommended by the concerned local body that a
person who is required to pay the court fees is not able to
pay the court fees because that person has no property
other than the property subject to the case or if a petition
is made by the person stating that matter, and the judge
has any reasonable ground to believe that matter.
If the judge makes an order to collect court fees later
fully or partly pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned employee
shall clearly write how much court fee has been collected and how
much is outstanding and attach the records thereof with the case-file.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), no court fees shall be charged in relation to a case for the use of a
government or public property.
Price or amount in question of property to be set out: (1) In
making a plaint, the value or amount in question of the property that is
claimed or disclaimed by the plaint shall be clearly set out in cash.
Except in a case set forth in sub-section (1), where only a
claim is made that any matter to be done has not been done or any
matter not to be done has been done or is about to be done, such a
claim shall also be set out clearly.
Where a plaint is made with a claim pursuant to subsection (2) and a decision has to be made allowing the provision of the
value or amount in question subsequently, the court shall, prior to
making such a decision, cause the plaint maker to pay the court fees
according to such a value or amount in question.
Bases for fixation of value or amount in question: For the purpose
of the payment of court fees, the value or amount in question of an
immovable property shall be fixed on the basis of the following order
of priority pursuant to Section 66:
Fees fixed by the land revenue office for the purpose of
registration,
The value fixed, if any, by the Government of Nepal for
the purpose of tax,
Locally prevailing value.
Value or amount in question to be taken as basis while collecting
court fees: In collecting the court fees, the same shall be collected on
the basis of the following value or amount in question:
Where the right in cash has to be established or claim in
cash to be de-established, the figure of the amount in
which the right or claim has to be so established or deestablished,
Where gold or silver has to be provided or claim therein
de-established, the figure to be set by the rate fixed by
the Nepal Rastra Bank, and failing such a figure, the
figure to be set as per the prevailing market rate,
Where a movable property other than that set forth in
clause (b) has to be provided or released, the figure to be
set as per the prevailing market value of that property,
Where a security or treasury bill has to be provided or
claim in it has to be de-established, the value set by the
stock exchange,
In the case of a movable property of which prevailing
market value is not set pursuant to clause (c), the figure
of value or amount in question set by the plaintiff,
Where yields of a land are claimed, the figure of yields of
the previous year not subject to natural calamities,
Where a claim in an immovable property is made or right
or claim in such property has to be de-established, the
figure of value or amount in question as set by the
plaintiff pursuant to Section 66,
Where a claim is made that the yields of land subject to
natural calamities have not been remitted, the figure of
yields claimed for remission,
Where a claim is made for the remission of any thing
other than the yields of a land, the figure of the thing so
claimed for remission,
Where a claim is made for the right of trust, priest,
Bhandere etc. or a claim therein has to be de-established
or a claim is made for releasing therefrom, the figure of
the residual income to be enjoyable upon administering
the functions of the trust and the figure or amount in
question of the land as specified where other claim is
made and the figure of such Khangi income of one year
as may be enjoyed where the land is not specified,
Where right in contract amount is claimed or right or
claim therein has to be de-established, the figure of
contract of such number of years as for which the
contract amount is claimed, and where a claim is made
only for loss in income, the figure of loss in income so
claimed,
In the case of a mortgage of an immovable property, the
figure of the amount in question set forth in the deed,
Where insolvency or date for repayment has to be
effected, the figure of the amount in question indicated
by the debtor,
Where a claim is made for the provision of salary,
allowance or installment, the figure as claimed,
Where a claim is made for compensation for loss of
wages, the figure of the value as claimed,
Where a claim is made for a principal, profit, dividend,
bonus, donation, gift, interest, house or shop rent or any
property, the figure of such a principal, profit, interest,
rent or property,
Where a claim is made for any compensation, the figure
of compensation so claimed,
Where a claim is made for act or recovery to be done or
made pursuant to a contract, the figure of such act or
recovery so claimed to be done or made.
Rate of court fees: There shall be charged the court fees at the
following rate from the value or figure of the amount in question as
claimed pursuant to Section 68 or a claim in which is prayed for deestablishment, in making a plaint:
Two hundred rupees for up to the first two thousand
rupees,
For up to twenty five thousand rupees, at the rate of four
percent for up to the second twenty three thousand rupees,
For up to one hundred thousand rupees, at the rate of
three percent for up to the third seventy five thousand
rupees,
For up to two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
of two percent for up to the fourth one hundred thousand
rupees,
For above two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
of one percent for any figure whatsoever thereabove.
Court fees to be charged in lump sum: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 69, the court fees of five hundred
rupees shall be charged in a case on any of the following matters and
matters related thereto:
Registration or transmission of a land or cancellation of
such a registration or transmission,
Claim of invoice and receipt,
Claim for invalidation of a deed, deed on repayment date,
guarantee letter, bond, receipt etc.,
Claim for eviction of tenant from a house or land or
claim against such eviction,
Claim on obstruction with the making of a dam, canal or
ditch or carrying of water through such a dam, canal or
ditch or on the use of water in defiance of order,
Claim for keeping an exit, window or door open or
closed, or for making, adding or closing a window, door
or veranda,
Claim for the issuance of an injunction or mandatory
order to refrain, or cause to be refrained, from doing any
act or to cause any act to be done or for the withholding
of such an order,
Determination of full competency, semi-competency or
incompetency of any person,
Divorce,
Settlement of relation,
Demand for judicial declaration of the death of a person
or cancellation of a judicial declaration or claim for
amendment thereto,
Claim for commencement or non-commencement of
insolvency proceeding,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a trustee,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a
guardian,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a curator,
Claim for usufruct or cancellation thereof,
Provided that the court fees shall be charged on the basis
of the value, if any, mentioned,
Claim for servitude or cancellation thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the court fees of one thousand rupees shall be charged on the
following cases:
Claim for the ascertainment or provision of a partition
share in the property subject to partition,
Voidance of a deed or document.
Special provision relating to collection to court fees: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 70, the court fees shall
be charged as follows on the following cases:
The court fees pursuant to Section 68 where the right in
any property has to be established or de-established from
the plaintiff's or appellant's pleas,
Where an inventory of property is not submitted along
with a plaint on the partition case and the amount in
question of the property is ascertained as set forth in an
inventory submitted along with a statement of defense or
required by the court, the court fees as per the figure of
such an amount in question,
Where a plaint is made claiming both principal and
interest, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued up
to the date of filing of plaint,
Where the judgment decrees the recovery of interest as
well, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued from
the date of filing of plaint to the date of the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the value or amount in question is set out in any case, the court
fees shall be charged on the basis of the value or amount in question
as mentioned in the other Sections of this Chapter and the court fees
of one thousand rupees shall be charged, subject to Section 70, in any
other case whatever in which the value or amount in question is not
set out.
Value of previous day on which case is filed to be set: (1) In setting
the value of any property for the purposes of the court fees pursuant to
this Chapter, the value shall be set taking as the basis the value of the
property prevailing on the previous day of the day on which the case
is filed.
Court fees chargeable on making appeal: (1) Irrespective of the
level in which an appeal is made in a case in which the value or
amount in question is set out, there shall be charged the court fees at
the rate of fifteen percent of the court fees chargeable while filing a
plaint, up to the extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
In making an appeal at any level in a partition case in
which the amount in question is not set out, there shall be charged the
court fees equal to the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint.
Where an appeal is made to the second layer court
against the appeal judgment made by the first layer court hearing
appeal, there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen
percent of the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the
extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
Court fees chargeable for making review or revision of case:
Where, on a petition made for the review or revision of any case in
accordance with law, an order is made to review or revise the case,
there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen percent of the
court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the extent to which
the pray is made to have a review or revision upon being unsatisfied.
Payment of court fees, penalty and fine: (1) In making an appeal by
any party of a case against the original judgment or in making an
appeal to the second layer court hearing appeal against the judgment
of the first layer court hearing appeal, there shall be paid the court fees
as held to have been provided by the party to the other party in
pursuance of the judgment.
In making a petition by any party of a case for its review
of revision in accordance with law, there shall be paid the court fees
charged pursuant to the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, if any penalty or fine is imposed on any party of a case
pursuant to the judgment, no memorandum of appeal or petition made
for the review or revision of a case shall be filed without payment of
such a penalty or fine or furnishing of security for the same.
Court fees required to be paid in cash: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in this Chapter, the court fees shall be paid in cash.
If payment of court fees is made to the court pursuant to
this Section, the concerned employee shall credit the court fees to the
cash book, duly prepare a receipt thereof in duplicate, give one copy
to the person making payment of court fees and retain the other copy
in the concerned case-file.
Shortfall court fees caused to be paid: (1) If it appears, in filing a
plaint or memorandum of appeal, or from the contents of the plaint or
memorandum of appeal, that payment of court fees less than the court
fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter is tendered, the court shall
cause the shortfall court fees to be paid immediately.
(2) If any person, being unable to pay the shortfall court fees
immediately pursuant to sub-section (1), requests for a time-limit, the
court shall give the time-limit to the concerned person to pay the
shortfall court fees within the deadline for making a plaint or
memorandum of appeal if there are seven days to go for such a
deadline, and, if the deadline is of less than seven days, within seven
days.
If, subsequent to the filing of a plaint or memorandum of
appeal, the court comes to know in any manner that there have been
paid or taken the court fees less than the court fees required to be
collected pursuant to this Chapter or if a complaint is made by any
person on this matter and the complaint seems to be reasonable upon
examination of the complaint, the court shall appoint the due date to
pay the shortfall court fees within seven days if the party is on
recognizance and issue a summons to pay the shortfall court fees
within the time-limit of seven days if the party is not on recognizance.
If the party fails to pay the court fees within the period
given pursuant to sub-section (3), such a case shall not be entertained.
To return excess court fees: (1) If, in the course of proceedings of a
case, it is found on a petition by the party or in any other manner that
there have been collected excess court fees from any party, the court
shall return the excess court fees to the concerned party.
If it is found in any manner after the judgment on a case
that there have been collected excess court fees, the concerned party
may make a petition to the concerned court to get such court fees
returned to him/her.
If, in examining the petition received pursuant to subsection (2), the applicant's demand seems to be reasonable, the court
shall return court fees to the applicant.
Complaint may be made on court fees specified by court: (1) A
person who is not satisfied with the court fees specified by the court
pursuant to this Chapter may make a complaint to the judge of the
same court within three days if the payment of court fees has not been
made yet and within seven days prior to the judgment on the case
where the payment of court fees has already been made.
If, in examining the complaint received pursuant to subsection (1), it appears that there have been collected excess court fees,
the concerned judge shall make an order to return the excess court
fees, and the employee who has so collected the excess court fees may
be liable to departmental action.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (2), the
content of the complaint is held to be false, the person making such a
complaint shall be liable to a fine at the rate of fifteen percent of the
figure of the claim against the collection or specification of such
excess court fees.
Punishment for collection or payment of less court fees: (1) The
concerned party may make a complaint to the court where the case is
sub judice about the reduction of the value or amount in question with
intention to pay less court fees.
If, in examining a complaint received pursuant to subsection (1), or in examining the case-file by the court itself despite
that such a complaint has not been made, it appears that the value or
amount in question has been reduced with an intent to pay less court
fees, the court shall fine such a party with fifteen percent of the
reduced court fees and cause that party to pay the shortfall court fees.
If, in examining a complaint made pursuant to subsection (1), the complaint is held to be false, such a complainant shall
be liable to a fine of five percent of the figure as claimed to be
shortfall.
If it appears, from a complaint made by any person or in
any other manner, that any employee of the court has knowingly
collected the court fees less than that required to be collected, the
employee shall be liable to departmental action in accordance with
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
"knowingly" means the failure to collect the court fees pursuant to this
Chapter according to such value or amount in question as appeared
from the contents of the plaint or memorandum of appeal or evidence.
Where the final judgment has been passed on the case in
which less court fees have been collected pursuant to sub-section (4)
or the time-limit for appeal in such a case has already expired and
such court fees cannot be recovered from the concerned party, the
amount in question of the court fees shall be recovered from the
employee who has so collected less court fees.
Forfeiture of court fees: If the plaintiff or appellant loses the case in
which court fees are charged or if, upon proceeding with a petition for
review or revision of verdict, the previous judgment is not upheld, the
fees paid by him/her shall be forfeited.
Proceedings in cases where case is compromised, dismissed or
canceled: (1) In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed upon
full payment of the court fees, the court shall collect half the court
fees for the execution of deed of compromise and return the remaining
court fees to the plaintiff or appellant.
In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed on the
condition of collection of the whole or any of the court fees
subsequently, the court shall execute the deed of compromise only
after collecting the court fees chargeable pursuant to sub-section (1)
from the plaintiff or appellant.
If a case filed upon full payment of the court fees is
dismissed or canceled, the plaintiff or appellant shall not be liable to
any punishment.
If a case is dismissed or terminated, the court fees paid
shall not be returned.
If a case filed on the condition of collection of the whole
or any of the court fees subsequently is dismissed or terminated, the
remaining court fees shall be recovered from the plaintiff or appellant.
Provided that in the case of termination of a case, it appears that
the plaint that should not have been filed by virtue of the contents of
the plaint has been filed, the court fees collected in such a case shall
be returned.
If a case which has been compromised, dismissed or
canceled in fulfillment of the requirements of law is revived for any
reason on a complaint by the party of case and to be proceeded again,
the party on the complaint of whom the case is to be proceeded again
shall again pay the court fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter to
the court where the case is sub judice.
Recovery of court fees: (1) The winning party of a case in which
court fees have been paid shall be entitled to recover the court fees
paid by him/her from the losing party.
In making recovering of the court fees pursuant to subsection (1), such recovery shall be made according to such amount in
question as held to be recoverable from each of them if there are two
or more defendants or appellants, according to the extent of right or
claim that has to be de-established from them respectively on the
matter of de-establishment of right or claim and on pro rata basis from
the losing defendants or respondents in the other circumstances.
Where a plaint has been filed without payment of some
or whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant wins the case,
the court fees held to be chargeable shall be recovered from the other
party as a penalty or fine.
If the plaintiff or appellant has made a claim of several
matters, the plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover the
chargeable court fees from the other party only according to the extent
of the claim of that matter as held to be sustained.
Where a case has been filed without payment of some or
whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant loses the case, the
chargeable court fees shall be recovered from them.
If a judgment is passed under which the plaintiff or
appellant is entitled to recover the court fees pursuant to this Section
and the defendant or respondent dies prior to the recovery thereof, the
plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover such court fees from
person who succeeds the inheritance of such a defendant or
respondent.
If in passing a judgment on an appeal or a case for review
or revision, the appellant or applicant wins the case wholly or party,
the appellant or applicant shall be entitled to recover from the
respondent such court fees as held to be chargeable on the extent to
which he/she has so won.
Recovery of court fees to be made with priority: In making
recovery of, or collecting, an amount in question, fine, court fees and
other fees or charges in pursuance of judgment, the court shall first
recover or collect the court fees.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Plaint and Presentation of Claims
Claims to be made: (1) In order to have the matter of a claim made
by a person in accordance with law enforced by the court, the person
shall make such a claim to the court.
In making a claim pursuant to sub-section (1), there shall
be filed a plaint by fulfilling the procedures and terms as referred to in
this Chapter.
Plaint may be made on matter which a person has right in and is
enforceable: (1) Except as otherwise mentioned in this Chapter, in
filing a plaint pursuant to Section 85, the plaint shall be filed by a
person making claims only on the matter which the person has right in
and which can be enforced in accordance with law.
If a plaint is prayed for filing in a manner contrary to
sub-section (1), the plaint cannot be filed, and even if such a plaint has
been filed for any reason, it shall be voided, except in the case of a
plain filed under Section 91.
One plaint may be filed: (1) A person may file only one plaint
against another person on the matters despite that there are many
matters of claims of civil nature against such other person.
If, instead of making a plaint in a case in which the same
plaint can be made at the same time, a person files another plaint
subsequently only after considering the consequences of the plaint so
filed earlier, such a plaint shall not be entertained.
Number of plaintiff or defendant not to affect: In filing a complaint
in relation to the claim of any one matter, any one person may file one
plaint against many persons or many persons may file one plaint
against one person.
Plaint to be filed only once: (1) After a person has filed a plaint
against any person on a matter in a court, that person shall not file
another plaint against the same person on the same matter in the same
court or any other court.
If one party files a plaint on any one matter in a court and
the other party files a plaint on that matter in another court or both
parties file separate plaints in the same court, the court shall make an
order to try the case in pursuance of the plaint filed earlier and void
the other plaints.
Provided that in cases where plaints may be and ought to be
filed by both parties in accordance with law, nothing shall prevent the
hearing of both plaints.
Plaint to be filed within limitation: (1) In making a plaint, the plaint
shall be filed within the limitation specified by law for the submission
of claims on the matters as claimed in the plaint.
In filing a plaint pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
shall state by what law the limitation, within which it has been filed,
has been specified.
Any plaint tendered for filing in contravention of subsection (1) or (2) shall be endorsed and returned.
Plaint may be filed by any person on dispute involving public
interest or concern: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Code, any citizen of Nepal may, with the leave of
the court, make a plaint on a dispute involving the right, interest or
concern of the Government of Nepal or public interest or concern, as
the case may be.
In order to obtain the leave pursuant to sub-section (1), a
separate petition shall be filed along with the plaint.
Decision has to be made on the leave prayed for by a
petition pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day of the making of
petition.
Plaint may be filed to establish right: If the right of any third party
is also affected as a result of the judgment passed on a case in the
form of dismissal, repeal or otherwise or of the execution of a deed of
compromise in accordance with law, such a person may make a plaint
to void that judgment or deed of compromise and establish his/her
right, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge.
Plaint may be filed on behalf of legal person: (1) In making a plaint
on behalf of a body corporate recognized as a legal person in
accordance with law, the natural person authorized by the decision of
director or directors of such a body for the purposes of making the
plaint shall state that matter in, and make, the plaint.
In making a limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint shall also be accompanied by a copy of the decision of director
or directors made in relation to the making of a plaint.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), in making a plaint on behalf of any office of the Government of
Nepal, constitutional body or its office or court, the plaint may be
made by the office-bearer who acts as the administrative chief of such
an office.
Prohibition on lodging plaint on matter adjudged: (1) After a
judgment is made once on any matter, the same party shall not lodge a
plaint against the same person on the same matter, instead of making
an appeal against such a judgment in accordance with law.
A plaint filed in contravention of this Section shall be
void.
A judgment made in contravention of this Section shall
be void.
Matters to be stated in plaint: (1)
In making a plaint, the plaint
shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-1 and state, inter alia, the
following matters:
Subject matter of the dispute,
Defendant's name, surname and address, and telephone
number, email, to the extent available,
Ground for locus standi to file the plaint under the law,
Matters claimed,
Limitation,
Jurisdiction,
Whether plaint has been filed elsewhere on that matter or
Matter of how the summons/time-limit of plaint has to be
delivered to the defendant,
Evidence, if any, in support of the claims by the plaint.
No plaint made in contravention of sub-section (1) shall
be filed or entertained.
Claims of plaint ought to be clear: (1) In making a plaint, the
plaintiff shall specifically set out in the plaint what and which claim is
made in what and which matter (cause of action) and on the basis of
what and which ground and evidence of such a claim is based and
present his/her claim or demand before the court.
A plaint that does not clearly mention the claim and the
proceeding that has to be taken by the court pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall not be deemed to have met the requirement.
Plaint fees: In making a plaint, the plaint fees of two hundred rupees
shall be charged.
Filing of plaint: (1) If a plaint is tendered for filing, the court shall
examine whether the plaint meets the requirements pursuant to this
Chapter or nor and the proof and evidence set forth therein are
attached or not and file it in the diary book in the form set forth in
Schedule-2 if the plaint meets the requirements and give the
concerned party an evidence of the filing of plaint in the form set forth
in Schedule-3.
In producing the copies of the plaint pursuant to subsection (1) for the purpose of its registration, there shall be produced
two copies if the number of defendant is only one and one copy for
each of the two or more defendants.
Provided that despite the number of defendants living in an
undivided family, only one copy may be produced for such defendants.
In producing more than one copy of the plaint, the
plaintiff shall declare and sign that the copy corresponds to the
original, and the court shall verify the copy with the original.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint does not seem to meet the requirements, there shall be made an
endorsement on the plaint setting out the reason for failing to meet the
requirements.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Service of Summons
Plaint may be delivered to the defendant: (1) If, while filing a
plaint, the plaintiff wishes to deliver the plaint, accompanied by the
summons, to the person named as defendant in the plaint on his/her
own or through his/her law practitioner, the plaintiff shall state that
matter in the plaint; and if such a provision is made to deliver the
plaint, accompanied by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaintiff shall deliver a copy of the plaint, accompanied by the
summons, to the person named as the defendant within three days
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of filing of the
plaint by the plaintiff.
Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
tendered for delivery to the defendant pursuant to sub-section (1) and
the concerned person so wishes, that person shall receive the plaint,
accompanied by the summons, and where it is so received, it shall be
deemed to have been delivered duly.
Provided that in the case of a legal person, if the plaint,
accompanied by the summons, is so tendered for delivery, such a
person shall receive it.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if,
in delivering the plaint, accompanied by the summons, to a legal
person, it is delivered to the head office of such a person, it shall be
deemed to have been duly delivered to the concerned person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"head office" means the registered office, if any, of a body corporate,
and failing such an office, the main office carrying on the transaction
of such a person.
If the plaint is received pursuant to sub-section (2), the
receiver shall give a receipt in the form set forth in Schedule-4.
Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
delivered pursuant to sub-section (2), the plaintiff or the law
practitioner appointed by him/her shall submit a receipt of the
acknowledgment thereof to the court where the plaintiff has been filed,
within seven days after the delivery of the plaint, accompanied by the
summons.
The time-limit for the submission of a statement of
defense shall be set from the date of receipt of the plaint, accompanied
by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (5).
100. Issue of summons to defendant: (1) Except in cases where the
plaintiff himself or herself has delivered the plaint to the defendant,
the court filing the plaint shall, within three days after the date of
filing of the plaint, issue a summons to the defendant to submit the
statement of defense.
In serving the summons pursuant to sub-section (2), one
copy of the plaint filed by the plaintiff in the court and the evidence
attached therewith shall also be delivered.
101. To give time-limit: (1) If a complaint is lodged, the court shall,
setting out the matter, give a time-limit of twenty one days, excluding
the time required for journey, to the person against whom the
complaint has been lodged to appear in the court to defend in relation
to such a complaint.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
giving the time-limit to a person who is maintained as the defendant
by the court pursuant to Section 123, there shall be given a time-limit
of seven days, excluding the time required for journey.
102. Summons cause to be served: (1) In issuing the summons by the
court pursuant to Section 101, the concerned officer shall prepare the
summons or notice in triplicate and sign them, affix the seal of court
thereunto and cause the same to be served.
In issuing the summons in the name of the defendant in
any case in which a plaint is filed, provision shall be made to serve, or
cause to be served, the summons, accompanied by one copy of the
plaint to the person living in an undivided family and one copy of the
plaint for each defendant in the case of the other defendants.
The summons/time-limit issued pursuant to Section 101
shall be served by delivering it to the defendant or other person, and
taking a receipt of acknowledgment thereof.
103. Process server to serve summons: (1) The process server shall have
to serve a summons generally within three days excluding the time
required for journey, from the date on which he/she received the
summons from the court.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"process server" means an employee who is responsible or deputed to
serve the summons issued by the court, by delivering the same to the
concerned person.
104. Form of summons: (1) In issuing a summons by the court in the
name of a defendant in accordance with law, it shall be issued in the
form set forth in Schedule-5.
In issuing a summons by the court in the name of a
person other than a defendant, it shall be issued in the form set forth in
Schedule-6.
105. Summons deemed to have been served: (1) If summons issued by
the court is delivered to the concerned person at any time pursuant to
this Chapter or delivered to his/her address or is brought to his/her
knowledge in any other manner in accordance with this Code, the
summons shall be deemed to have been served.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the person receiving the summons appears in the court and makes a
petition to receive it in person, the summons shall be delivered to
him/her in the court, and where the summons is so delivered, the
summons shall be deemed to have been duly delivered.
106. Procedures relating to service of summons: (1) A court shall have
to prepare a summons in triplicate and deliver the same to the process
server.
If the summons server personally knows the concerned
person, he/she may, mentioning that matter, deliver the summons
received by him/her pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned
person at any place.
If the concerned person is not found pursuant to subsection (2), the summons server shall go to the address of his/her
residence, find out his/her house, rented house and identify the
concerned person and deliver the summons to the concerned person in
presence of the concerned ward chairperson or member or secretary or
any other employee of the ward committee of the concerned local
body and at least two local persons and obtain a receipt thereof,
indicating the date of service.
Where the person to whom the summons has been issued
cannot be found, the summons/time-limit shall be delivered to any
other major person living with him/her in an undivided family in
pursuance of the procedures referred to in sub-section (3).
Where the concerned person or any major person living
with him/her in an undivided family is not found or, albeit found,
refuses to receive the summons, the summons shall be served by
affixing it to the house or homestead of that person, conspicuously, in
presence of the persons as referred to in sub-section (3), and setting
out that matter in the summons.
In pursuing the procedures referred to in sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5), there shall be mentioned on the reverse of the
summons to be submitted to the court which procedure has been
followed to serve the summons by delivering or posting, along with
the date and time of the service of the summons, and the persons
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be caused to clearly sign it at the
time of delivery or posting.
The summons server shall sign the copy of the summons
served pursuant to sub-section (6) and submit it to the court, along
with a report thereof.
Where a summons has been served by affixing it to the
house or homestead pursuant to sub-section (5), the summons server
shall mention the date and time of service thereof on the third copy of
such a summons and deliver it to the concerned local body and take a
separate receipt thereof or the member or secretary or employee of the
concerned local body shall mention that matter on the reverse of the
service and sign and serve it.
Where a summons is delivered pursuant to sub-section
(8), the concerned local body shall affix such a summons to its notice
board.
(10) Even though a copy of the summons affixed to the house
or homestead pursuant to this Section has not been delivered to the
concerned local body or the local body has not affixed the summons
received by it to its notice-board, the summons shall be deemed to
have been served in accordance with law if it has been duly affixed to
the house or homestead of the concerned person pursuant to subsection (5).
(11) Where a summons is to be served on any body corporate
or legal person in relation to any case, the summons shall be served on
the person acting as principal person for the time being at the
registered office, head office or main office of transaction of such a
body or person.
Provided that if such a principal person is not available, the
summons may be served by delivering it to any office-bearer or
employee serving in such an office of such a body or person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"person acting as principal person" means the chief executive office of
a body corporate, and this expression means and includes the
chairperson, vice-chairperson, managing director, executive director,
general manager of such a body or the company secretary of a
company.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (10),
in serving a summons in the name of a government office,
constitutional body or court, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to the chief, administrative chief of such an office or any
office-bearer entrusted with such responsibility or an office-bearer
acting for him/her and by delivering the summons to such an office,
body or court, setting out that matter, if any such office-bearer is not
available.
(13) In serving a summons in the name of a government
office, constitutional body, court, body corporate or such an officebearer or employee in that capacity, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to such an office, body, court or such an office-bearer,
employee or office of such a body corporate.
(14) If a summons cannot be served pursuant to sub-sections
(10), (11), (12) and (13), the concerned summons server shall give a
report to the concerned court within three days.
(15) If a report is submitted pursuant to sub-section (14), the
concerned court shall make an order to serve the summons through
postal service on such an office, body, court or body corporate or its
office-bearer or employee in that capacity.
(16) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (15), the
concerned court may serve the summons in the name of the office,
body, court or body corporate or its office-bearer or employee in that
capacity by sending a registered letter containing that matter.
(17) After a return receipt of the summons sent by post
pursuant to sub-section (16) is submitted to the court, the summons
shall, except as otherwise proved, be deemed to have been duly served.
(18) Where records of houses or block numbers of the persons
residing within the area of any local body have been maintained
systematically or where such persons have consented to the service of
a summons by the court by post in relation to their transaction,
business or any other matter, the court may so serve the summons,
notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section.
(19) If a person is an office-bearer or employee of any
government office, constitutional body, court or body corporate and a
summons issued in the name of that person cannot be served pursuant
to sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5), the concerned court may, based on
the report of the concerned summons server, make an order to serve
the summons on such a person in accordance with sub-section (13) or
(15).
(20) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (19), the
summons shall be served on the name of the concerned person in
accordance with that order.
(21) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the party and opposite party of a case have provided for
their respective address of exchanging electronic notice such as email
and fax to give notice to each other in relation to any document, the
concerned matter or transaction or send a summons in relation to a
dispute, the summons may be served through an electronic notice to
such address.
(22) If the summons server submits to the concerned court a
report that a summons could not be served in the name of the
concerned person despite following the procedures set forth in various
sub-sections of this Section and the court considers that the contents
of the report are reasonable, the court may make an order to serve the
summons in the name of such a person by publishing it in a daily
newspaper of national circulation.
(23) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (22), the
summons shall be served in accordance with that order.
(24) The concerned person shall bear the expenses incurred in
the service of the summons by publishing it in a daily newspaper of
national circulation pursuant to sub-section (22).
107. Summons may be served in the court itself: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 104 or 105, a summons issued by any
court in the name of the following person, by delivering it to such a
person in the court in the following circumstance:
If the employee or office-bearer of the concerned court is
in attendance, while he/she is in the court,
If a party is on recognizance in any other case in the
concerned court, when such a party appears in the court,
If there is an attorney representing any party of a case
that is sub judice in the concerned court, when the
attorney appears in the court in the course of such
representation,
If the person is a law practitioner who appears in the
concerned court in the course of law practice, when
he/she appears in the curt in the course of such practice,
If the person is one who appears as a witness, when
he/she appears in the court in that capacity.
If a summons issued by the court in the name of the
person as referred to in sub-section (1) is tendered for delivery to that
person when he/she appears in the concerned court, the person shall
receive the summons.
If the person refuses to receive such a summons tendered
for delivery pursuant to sub-section (2), the summons server shall give
a report thereof to the concerned court immediately.
If a report is given pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
contents seem to be reasonable, the court shall make an order to
prevent that person from making representation in the capacity of
attorney, taking due date, doing law practice or making deposition in
the capacity of witness in that court until the person receives the
summons issued by the court in his/her name.
108. To witness service of summons: (1) The concerned ward chairperson
or member or secretary of the ward committee of the local body or
any other government employee and local person in the place where a
summons has to be served shall, while serving the summons pursuant
to this Chapter, assist the summons server in the service of such a
summons, by witnessing the service thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
summons which has been duly served in fulfillment of the other
procedures shall not be invalid by the reason only that the concerned
member, secretary of the concerned local body or other employee has
not witnessed and cooperated in the service of summons or has
refused to cooperate in such service.
109. Person failing to assist being liable to punishment: (1) In serving a
summons sent by the court for service, the concerned member,
secretary of the concerned local body or other government employee
or local person, as well, shall render all such assistance as required to
serve the summons, by searching, showing and identifying the house
of the concerned person, and witness and sign the service as required.
The concerned court may, based on the court of the
summons server, punish one who fails to render assistance pursuant to
sub-section (1) with a fine of up to one hundred rupees.
110. Examination of summons served: Immediately when a report on the
service of summons is submitted by the concerned summons server
after serving it pursuant to Section 105, the concerned office
employee of the court shall examine whether the summons so served
has been duly served or not and certify it if it appears to have met the
requirements and mention the date of its submission to the court and
record it in the case-file.
111. Requirement to make re-service: (1) If, upon making examination
pursuant to Section 109, it appears that the summons served has been
served without in fulfillment of the requirements of law or if, in
examining it upon a complaint made by any person, it appears that the
summons has been served unduly or has not been served at all, the
court shall order the concerned process server or other summons
server to serve it again in fulfillment of the requirements.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such a
process server shall serve the summons again pursuant to Section 106.
112. Process server liable to punishment: If the process server fails to
deliver the third copy of the summons affixed to the house or
homestead of the concerned person when that person is not found to
the concerned local body, such a process server shall be liable to a
fine of up to one thousand rupees for each instance, and the concerned
court may also make an order also to take a departmental action
against such a process server employee.
113. Service of summons may be made by delivering it to attorney or
law practitioner: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section
106, where a person has appointed an attorney to receive a summons
to be served on that person in accordance with law or appointed a law
practitioner for that purpose, such a summons may be served on that
attorney or law practitioner.
The summons served on the attorney or law practitioner
of a party pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be valid as if it were served
on the concerned party himself or herself in consonance with law.
In delivering a plaint accompanied by a summons to a
law practitioner pursuant to Section 99 or serving a summons/timelimit on an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with clauses (c)
or (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 107 and with this Section, a receipt
shall be taken from such an attorney or law practitioner in the form set
forth in Schedule-7.
114. Service of summons in the name of person whose house, address is
not identified: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 106,
in issuing a summons in the name of a person whose house, address is
not identified, the summons may be served by posting it at the place
where the village, city and street of such a person is set down and on
the notice-board of the court, setting out the matter if even such
village, city and street is not identified and publishing it in a
newspaper to be published in the territory over which the court has
jurisdiction.
If a summons/time-limit is published in a newspaper
pursuant to sub-section (1), such a summons/time-limit shall be
deemed to have been served duly.
115. Service of summons on person outside territory: (1) In serving a
summons in the name of a person who is living or residing outside the
territorial jurisdiction of a case in which case has been filed, a
required number of copies of the summons, accompanied by the order
of such a court, shall be sent to the court having territorial jurisdiction
over the territory where that person is living or residing, and the court
in that territory shall also effect the service of summons in fulfillment
of the requirements as set forth in Section 106.
The court so serving the summons shall send the
summons served pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned court.
116. One who serves, or causes to be served, unduly or causes
obstruction being liable to punishment: Based on a report of the
concerned summons server or a complaint by a person, the court shall
institute action against the person who does the following act and may
impose the punishment of a fine of up to ten thousand rupees or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or both on such a
person:
Failing to cause the service of a summons issued by the
court without a reasonable reason,
Serving or causing to be served a summons upon setting
down false matters or making false contents,
Making objection or obstruction to the service of a
summons,
Tearing out or peeling off the affixed summons,
Failing to render assistance by the office-bearer with duty
to assist in or witness the service of a summons.
117. Summons unduly served being liable to be void: (1) A party of a
case may, at any time prior to the adjudication of the case, make a
petition to the court claiming that the summons required to have been
served in fulfillment of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter
has not been served in fulfillment of such procedures or has not been
served at all.
If the court holds the contents of the petition as referred
to in sub-section (1) to be reasonable, the court may make an order to
void the summons served unduly and re-serve the summons or order
the concerned party to receive the summons from the court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if, in examining a summons served pursuant to this Chapter, it
appears that the summons has been served without fulfilling the
requirements, the court shall void such a summons and cause the
summons to be served again in fulfillment of the requirements.
118. Appeal equivalent to statement of defense may be made: (1) A
person who is named as a defendant in the plaint may make an appeal
equivalent to the statement of defense to the concerned court hearing
appeal, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge but not later
than six months of the date of ex parte decision by the lower court,
setting out the matter that such a decision has been made by the lower
court against him/her for the reason that he/she was not able to make
defense or to submit a statement of defense in the case as a result of
the service of the summons unduly and without fulfilling the
procedures set forth in this Chapter.
If an appeal equivalent to the statement of defense is
made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court hearing appeal shall, prior
to hearing the memorandum of appeal, shall decide whether or not the
summons was served duly on the person named as the defendant in
the plaint or on the person maintained as the defendant by the court
pursuant to Section 123.
If, on making hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court hearing appeal holds that the summons was not served duly on
the defendant of the case or the maintained as the defendant by the
court pursuant to Section 123, the court hearing appeal shall void the
ex parte decision by the lower court, order the lower court to again
hear and settle the case in accordance with law by maintaining the
memorandum of appeal as the statement of defense, and remand the
case file to that court.
If the case-file, accompanied by its order, is received
from the court hearing appeal pursuant to sub-section (3), the
concerned district court shall issue and serve a summons giving seven
days time-limit, excluding the time required for journey, on the
plaintiff within three days of the receipt of such a case-file.
If the summons referred to in sub-section (4) is served,
the case shall be heard and adjudicated in accordance with law once
the plaintiff appears within the time-limit or the time-limit expires.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Statement of Defense and Counterclaim
119. Statement of defense to be submitted: (1) The defendant shall have
to submit a statement of defense to the concerned court within twenty
one days after the date of delivery of the plaint to the defendant or the
date of service of the summons to submit the statement of defense
pursuant to Chapter 8.
Except as otherwise mentioned elsewhere in this Code, a
statement of defense tendered for submission after the period as
referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be filed, and the court shall not
recognize such a statement of defense despite the fact that it has been
filed.
120. Matters to be set out in statement of defense: In submitting a
statement of defense, the statement of defense shall be submitted in
the form set forth in Schedule-8, setting out, inter alia, the following
matters:
The date of service of summons issued for the
submission of the statement of defense,
The matter to admit or reject the claims of plaint,
If the claim of the plaint is denied, reason and ground
thereof,
The matter of counterclaim, if any, against the plaintiff,
Matters concerning claim, if so designed, against locus
standi, limitation and jurisdiction of the court,
The evidence and pointes of reasons and grounds for
substantiating or refuting the claims and pleas set forth in
the statement of defense,
The matter whether order or decision has to be made by
the court in accordance with the plaintiff's demand.
121. Submission of counterclaim: (1) In submitting the statement of
defense, the defendant may admit or rebut the plaintiff's claims.
If the plaintiff's claims are refuted or denied pursuant to
sub-section (1), the reasons and grounds for such rebuttal or denial
shall be set down.
If the defendant wishes to make any claim against the
plaintiff in the statement of defense as referred to in sub-section (1),
he/she may make such a claim; and if he/she makes such a claim,
the/she shall be deemed to have made a counterclaim.
The counterclaim as referred to in sub-section (3) shall be
set down in the statement of defense and be limited to the matters of
claims by the plaintiff.
If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
defendant shall, in submitting the statement of defense, produce two
copies of the statement of defense if the plaintiff is only one and one
copy thereof for each other plaintiff if there are two or more plaintiffs.
Provided that it shall suffice to produce only one copy for the
plaintiffs living in an undivided family despite the number of such
plaintiffs.
If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court fees as referred to in Chapter-6 shall be paid for the same.
Out of the two copies of the statement of defense
submitted pursuant to sub-section (5), the court shall deliver one copy
to the plaintiff making presence on the due date appointed by the court
immediately after the submission of the statement of defense.
Within fifteen days of the submission of the statement of
defense pursuant to sub-section (7), the plaintiff shall submit a
defense in writing stating whether he/she admits or rebuts the
counterclaim to the concerned court.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, where the defendant makes a deposition equivalent to the
statement of defense in writing before the court and makes a
counterclaim, a copy of the written record of such a deposition shall
be provided to the plaintiff pursuant to sub-section (6).
(10) Where a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (9),
the court shall order such a party to pay the court fees as referred to in

Chapter-6 within three days, and in the event of payment of the court
fees in pursuant of such an order, his/her counterclaim shall be
entertained.
122. Filing of statement of defense: (1) The statement of defense tendered
for filing by a person who is named as a defendant in a plaint shall be
examined and be filed if it is found to be within the time-limit and
meet the requirements, and a receipt thereof shall be given to the
concerned party in the form as referred to in Schedule-3 and that party
shall be held on recognizance.
If, in examining the statement of defense pursuant to subsection (1), it appears that it has been tendered after the expiration of
the time-limit or it does not meet the requirements, there shall be
made an endorsement on the statement of defense, for the reasons to
be recorded on the statement of defense.
123. Making defendant by the court: (1) If, notwithstanding any a plaint
has not been filed against any person, it appears that the right, interest,
claim or concern of that person is affected by trying, hearing or
settling of any case or it appears the involvement of other person as
well on the matter of claims by the plaint from the contents of the
plaint or the statement of defense or it is necessary to enquire any
person into any matter for any other reasonable reason, the court may,
for the reasons to be recorded, order to examine such a person.
In examining any person pursuant to sub-section (1), a
summons of seven days shall be served on that person, and if that
person receives the summons and makes presence, the court shall take
his/her deposition setting out evidence.
If a person examined pursuant to sub-section (3) wishes
to make a deposition setting out evidence, his/her deposition shall be
recorded and if that person requests for the submission of written
response, an order shall be made to submit the written response within
a reasonable period.
If it appears from the deposition or written response as
referred to in sub-section (3) that such a person has also a concern or
involvement in the matter of the plaintiff' claims or judgment by the
court would also affect his/her right, interest, claim or concern, the
person shall be held on recognizance as if he/she were a defendant.
If it appears from the written response or deposition
submitted or made pursuant to sub-section (3) that such a person is
merely like evidence, it is not required to hold him/her on
recognizance.
124. Petition for standing as defendant: (1)
If any other person so
wishes, that person may make a petition to the court to stand him/her
as a defendant in a case that is sub judice in the court, showing that
he/she has a right, interest, claim or concern in the case and his/her
right, interest, claim or concern will also be affected from a judgment
on that case, within sixty days after the date of submission of the
statement of defense by the persons named as defendants in that case
or after the expiration of the time-limit for the submission of the
statement of defense.
If a petition as referred to in sub-section (1) is received
and the contents of petition seem to be reasonable, the court shall by
its order maintain that person as a defendant and give information
thereof to the plaintiff and the defendant of the case.
Provided that the defendant so maintained shall not be entitled
to make a counterclaim against the plaintiff.
125. Fees for statement of defense: In submitting a statement of defense,
there shall be charged the fees of two hundred and fifty rupees.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Endorsement
126. Document to be examined: The concerned officer shall, immediately
when a plaint or statement of defense tendered for filing in the court,
or a petition or memorandum of appeal to be filed in the course of
proceedings of a case is tendered for filing, study such a document
and examine whether it is in the form set forth in law, is within the
limitation, falls under the jurisdiction of the court, sets out such
matters as required to be set out, it contains any error, incompletion in
writing, presentation or mentioning or any difference between letters
and figures and whether it does not meet the requirements under the
law for any reason.
127. To provide opportunity to correct document failing to meet
requirements: (1) If, in making examination pursuant to Section 126,
such a document seems to consist of errors such as failing to be in the
form set forth in law, failing to set out the matters required to be set
out or containing any error, incompletion in writing, presentation or
mentioning or any difference between letters and figures and such a
document can be registered if such errors are corrected and then the
document tendered for filing, the concerned officer of the court shall
make endorsement on the document setting out the matters to be
corrected or made in conformity with the requirements and date the
endorsement, and affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.
If an endorsement is made pursuant to sub-section (1), ,
the court shall order the filing of such a document if it is tendered for
filing upon making it meet the requirements within the remaining
limitation or time-limit, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for
more than three days, or within three days after the date of
endorsement, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for less than
three days.
If an order as referred to in sub-section (2) is made, such
a document shall be filed.
128. Endorsement to be made: If, in making examination pursuant to

Section 126, it seems that such a document cannot be filed because of
reasons such as being not within the limitation or time-limit, not
falling within the jurisdiction of the concerned court, not being
required or allowed to be tried by the court or being contrary to law,
the concerned officer of the court shall, setting down the grounds and
reasons for making such an endorsement in that document, endorse
and date it, affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.
129. Records to be maintained in court: One copy of the document
returned pursuant to Section 127 or endorsed pursuant to Section 128
shall be recorded in the court.
130. Petition against order of endorsement: (1) A party who is not
satisfied with the matter of endorsement made by the concerned
officer of any court pursuant to Section 128 may make a petition to
the judge of such a court and to the court hearing appeal if such an
endorsement is made by the judge himself or herself, praying for an
order to file the document submitted by that party.
If a petition is made to the judge pursuant to sub-section
(1), the judge shall make an order whether the matter of endorsement
is in conformity with law or not within fifteen days after the date of
making petition.
Prior to making an order pursuant to sub-section (2), the
judge may, without examination or not, conduct hearings on the
matter of whether the endorsement is in conformity with law or not,
and if, upon conducting hearings, the endorsement does not appear to
be in conformity with law, the judge shall make an order to file the
document.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
endorsement making officer shall, upon receipt of such an order, file
such a document.
If, upon conducting hearings pursuant to sub-section (3),
the endorsement appears to be in conformity with law, the judge may,
for reasons to be recorded, dismiss the petition.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Due Date for Appearance
135. Party or opponent required to appear on due date: (1) Except in
cases where appearance on the appointed due date is not required or
where a party is not required by a court order to appear on the
appointed due date, a case shall be heard, tried and settled by
requiring each party of the case to appear on the appointed due date.
After the examination by the court of evidence of both
plaintiff and defendant, any party if he/she so wishes may not appear
on the appointed due date with the leave of the court.
136. Appointment of the same due date for appearance: (1) The
court
shall appoint the same due date for both plaintiff and defendant
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 135 if they are on recognizance.
In appointing the due date pursuant to sub-section (1)
after the filing of the plaint, the date shall be so appointed for the
plaintiff by calculating the period in which a statement of defense is
submitted or likely to be submitted, by estimating the time-limit for
the submission of the statement of defense.
If the due date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) does
not correspond to the period in which the defendant has submitted the
statement of defense, the due dates subsequent to the submission of
the statement of defense shall be so appointed that such dates are the
same for both plaintiff and defendant.
137. Appointment of due date by assigning purpose: (1) In appointing
the due date pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall appoint the due
date for appearance by setting down in the book of due date and the
sheet of due date the reason and purpose for which the date has been
appointed and the proceeding to be carried out on each date.
The proceeding specified shall be carried on the due date
appointed pursuant to sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
the specified proceeding cannot be conducted for any reasonable
ground on the appointed due date or the time does not allow to
complete the proceeding on such date, the court shall set down the
same matter in the receipt of due date for appearance, and appoint
another due date for appearance.
The book of due date and the sheet of due date for
appearance shall be maintained in the forms set forth in Schedule-7
and Schedule-8, respectively.
138. Not to overlap due date for appearance: (1) If a case has been filed
by or against a party of a case, other than a case in which an attorney
has been appointed in accordance with law, in another court that is
outside fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) of the case in which the
case has been filed and the party gives information thereof to the court
in which the case has been filed by making a petition thereto, such
court shall, while appointing the due date for appearance, so appoint
such due date as not to overlap with the due date appointed by that
other court in the case being tried by it.
If a party who is on recognizance in more than one case
in which the same party is plaintiff or defendant in the same court
makes a petition, setting out the matter, to the court for the
appointment of the same due date, the court shall, as far as practicable,
appoint the same due date for all cases.
If the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1)
and the party of the case appears before any one section on the
appointed due date, the party shall be deemed to have appeared on the
due date for the other cases in the same section.
If any party to a case appears on the due date appointed
pursuant to this Section, he/she shall be caused to sign the receipt of
the due date and his/her appearance shall then be recorded.
If a party does no appear pursuant to sub-section (4), the
concerned party shall be deemed to have expired the due date, and the
concerned authority shall certify that matter.
The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
shall be attached with the concerned case-file.
The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-11.
139. Due date for appearance deemed to have been appointed on the
following day: If the court remains closed owing to public holiday
falling on the due date appointed by the court, the due date for
appearance shall be deemed to have been appointed on the following
day of the end of the public holiday.
140. Requirement to give information in event of person required to
appear on due date appointed for appearance being held in
detention: (1) Where a person required to appear before any court on
the due date appointed for appearance in the course of any case has
been held in detention for any reason, the concerned party shall give
information of that matter indicating in which case he/she has been
held in detention to the court in which he/she has to appear in relation
to the case.
If information of being held in detention is received
pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned court shall seek from the
concerned body information as to why he/she has been held in
detention and how long he/she has to be held in detention.
If information is sought pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned body shall give the court information about the reason for
holding the person in detention and possible days for which he/she has
to be held in detention, and information to the effect that he/she
cannot be released from detention if so.
If, upon the information received pursuant to sub-section
(3), the person held in detention is to be released within one month,
and that person appears before the court within seven days from the
date of release from detention, excluding the time required for journey,
the case shall be tried by appointing the due date for appearance in
accordance with law, as if that day were the date of appearance.
If, upon the information received from the concerned
body pursuant to sub-section (3), the person required to appear on the
due date appointed for appearance remains in detention for a term
exceeding one month or the day of his/her release from detention is
not certain or there exists a circumstance that he/she cannot be
released from detention, it is not necessary to stay the proceeding,
hearing, trial and settlement of the case.
If a person held in detention appoints and send an
attorney to act on his/her behalf during such period, the attorney so
appointed may do and take action on his/her behalf.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), if
a case cannot be settled without subpoenaing and examining any party
of the case, the case may be heard, tried and settled by subpoenaing
and examining that party in accordance with law.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a party of a case who being on recognizance has been held
in detention in the course of the proceeding of the case is released
from detention and appears within seven days, excluding the time
required for journey, after the date of release, the case shall be tried by
holding him/her on recognizance.
141. Not to expire appointed due date: (1) Except as otherwise provided
for in law, where any party to a case is on recognizance in accordance
with this Chapter, such a party or his/her attorney shall not fail to
appear on the due date appointed by the court for appearance and
thereby to expire the appointed due date, by failing to.
If any party to a case fails to appear on the due date for
appearance appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) and expires the same,
the following provisions shall apply to the following matters, after the
expiration of the period of the due date for appearance allowed to be
extended pursuant to this Chapter:
If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
the filing of the plaint but prior to the submission of the
statement of defense, the plaint claim shall be dismissed.
If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
the submission of the statement of defense and it appears
or is held that the defendant has admitted the plaintiff's
claims in whole or in part, the court shall pass a
judgment accordingly to such an extent of admission and
dismiss the remaining claims.
If the defendant does not submit the statement of defense
or expires the due date for appearance after the
submission of the statement of defense, the court shall
examine all proofs and evidence produced by the plaintiff,
appreciate the proofs and evidence of the plaintiff and the
defendant and adjudge the case accordingly.
If, subsequent to the filing of the plaint or submission of
the statement of defense, both plaintiff and defendant
expire the due date for appearance, the case shall be
dismissed.
If a case is dismissed pursuant to clauses (a), (b), (c) or
(d) of sub-section (2), no other plaint claim by the same plaintiff
against the same defendant on the same matter shall lie.
142. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section 141, if a party
fails to appear before the court on the time-limit or due date for
appearance appointed in any case and expires such a time-limit or due
date owing to a force majeure event, such a party shall be entitled to
the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance for a period
not exceeding twenty one days for two times in maximum.
142. Provisions relating to fixation of instance: (1) In fixing the instance
where the due date for appearance once appointed and received
subsequent to the filing of a case is expired by a party to the case, the
instance shall be fixed by computing only the expired due date for
appearance but not computing the extended time-limit.
In computing days for the extension of the due date for
appearance expired by the party of a case, provision shall be made to
have extension by reckoning the days up to the day allowed to be
extended with effect from the following day of the day of expiration
of the time-limit or due date for appearance, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a case is remanded by a higher court to a lower court to readjudge it or a case suspended is revived, the instance of the timelimit or due date for appearance extended previously shall not be
counted.
144. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any
party to a case makes a petition to the court where the case has been
filed for the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance
which has been expired owing to the existence of the following
circumstance, and the court holds the petition to be reasonable, the
court shall order the extension of the expired time-limit or due date, as
the case may be:
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the timelimit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
person himself or herself had to observe obsequies and
appears before the court within seven days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of completion of
obsequies, and makes a petition for the extension of the
time-limit or due date for appearance, the court shall
extend the expired time-limit or due date for appearance
for that period.
If a woman required to appear before the court at the due
date for appearance expires the time-limit or due date for
appearance for the reason that she has delivered a child
and appears before the court within thirty days, excluding
the time required for journey, after the day of delivery,
and makes a petition for the extension of the time-limit or
due date, the court shall extend the expired time-limit or
due date for appearance for that period.
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the time585
limit or due date for appearance for the reason that
movement has been difficult because the route has
remained closed or motor vehicles have not plied because
of a natural calamities such as earthquake, flood,
landslide and snow-fall or for other natural calamity and
appears before the court within ten days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of resumption of
such a route, and makes a petition, accompanied by an
evidence issued by the concerned local body or other
competent body, indicating the date of closure of the
route and the date of resumption of the route, as for the
extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance,
the court shall extend the expired time-limit or due date
for appearance for that period.
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the timelimit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
person has been abducted or taken hostage by another
person and appears before the court within seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
release from abduction or hostage, and makes a petition
for the extension of the time-limit or due date for
appearance, the court shall extend the expired time-limit
or due date for appearance for that period.
145. Computation of time required for journey: (1) In computing the
time required for journey, it shall be computed according to the actual
days required to make journey by bus or rail in the case of a place
where regular transport service is in operation and at the rate of one
day for every fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in the case of a
place where such bus or rail service is not in operation.
In computing the time required for journey pursuant to
sub-section (1), the time-limit of one day shall be given for a distance
of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh).
Provided that no time required for journey shall be given for a
distance of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in total.
146. Not to settle case until the period allowed to be extended: Even
though a party to a case fails to appears at the time-limit or due date
for appearance appointed by the court and expires such time-limit or
due date, the court shall not try and settle the case pending the
completion of the period allowed to be extended pursuant to Section
142 or 144.
147. Government of Nepal not required to remain on recognizance: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
Government of Nepal shall not be required to remain on recognizance
in a case in which the Government of Nepal, constitutional body or
court is a plaintiff or defendant in accordance with law.
Provided that the government attorney shall appear on the day
of examination of evidence, hearing of the case or on the day ordered
by the court for the attorney to make appearance to represent such an
agency.
148. Power to try and settle cases at appeal level without holding
parties on recognizance: Except as otherwise ordered by the court,
cases at the appeal level may be tried and settled without holding
parties on recognizance.

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Attorney
149. Appointment of attorney: (1) Any party of a case may appoint a
representative to carry out any acts that pertain to the case in the court
on his/her behalf.
Where a representative is appointed pursuant to subsection (1), an attorney shall be deemed to have been appointed.
In appointing an attorney pursuant to sub-section (2),
there shall be executed a deed pursuant to Section 151.
A party to a case may revoke at any time the attorney
appointed under this Section by filing a petition before the court or
may appoint another attorney by executing another deed.
150. Qualification of person to be appointed as attorney: A person who
possesses the following qualification may be eligible to appointed as
an attorney:
A person who is competent to enter into a contract in
accordance with law,
A person who is not in default of payment of a
government amount in question according to judgment
and any such fees, court fees as required to be paid to the
court for the execution of judgment or any fine or
punishment imposed by the court,
Any person who has not been sentenced to any offence of
forgery, fraud, corruption or offence involving moral
turpitude.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
prevent any party to a case from appointing any person
living in an undivided family as his/her attorney.
151. Matters to be set out in power of attorney: (1) A power of attorney
set down for appointing an attorney pursuant to this Chapter shall set
out the following matters:
Short description of the reason for the appoint of attorney,
The full names, addresses, and ages of the persons who
appoint an attorney and who are to be appointed as an
attorney, and their citizenship number or other
description identifying them,
The acts authorized to be done by the attorney,
The matter that one who appoints and one who is to be
appointed under the power of attorney are not in default
of payment of a government amount in question
according to judgment and any such fees, court fees as
required to be paid to the court for the execution of
judgment or any fine or punishment imposed by the court,
The venue and date of the execution of the power of
attorney.
The power of attorney shall be executed in the form set
forth in Schedule-9.
The power of attorney as referred to in sub-section (2)
shall be signed by the party appointing the attorney and also mention
the identification of at least two witnesses and the conveyancer of the
power of attorney.
152. Person may become attorney in more than one case: A person may
be appointed as an attorney simultaneously in more than once case or
by more than one person in the same case.
Provided that a person who is an attorney of a party to a case
shall not also become an attorney of the opposite party to the same
case simultaneously.
153. Party may be attorney: In cases where the same party of a case
involves two or more than two persons as plaintiffs or defendants,
any one of them may be appointed as an attorney in the same case on
behalf of others.
154. Attorney may be appointed in more than one court: A person who
has been appointed as an attorney in a case sub judice in a court may
be appointed as an attorney in another case sub judice in another court.
155. Powers of attorney: The powers of an attorney shall be as set forth
in the power of attorney executed at the time of appointment of the
attorney.
156. Power of attorney to meet requirements: (1) Prior to registering a
power of attorney, the court shall examine whether such power of
attorney meets the requirements in accordance with this Chapter and
register it if it appears to meet such requirements.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that the power of attorney does not meet the requirements for
registration, it shall be endorsed setting out the reason for its failure to
meet such requirements and file it within a period of three days along
with such requirements.
If the power of attorney endorsed pursuant to sub-section
(2) is executed in meeting of the requirements and produced within
the time-limit, the court shall register such power of attorney.
157. Power to change attorney or carry out proceeding in person: (1) If
a party to a case who has once appointed an attorney so wishes, the
party may at any time revoke the power of attorney executed by
him/her and carry out acts pertaining to the case in person or appoint
another person as his/her attorney.
In the event of the appointment of an attorney or carrying
out of acts pertaining to the case by the party in person pursuant to
sub-section (2), the power of attorney appointing the attorney shall be
attached with the case-file, or record thereof shall be maintained if the
party carries out such acts in person.
158. Provisions relating to authorized attorney: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a person may appoint
another person as an authorized attorney by executing a power of
attorney, to file a plaint, submit a statement of defense, withdraws
plaint claim or enter into compromise or carry out any other legal
action on his/her behalf, with or without specifying any case.
If any summons or summons required to be given to or
served on the concerned party of a case in which an authorized
attorney has been appointed is given to or served on the authorized
attorney, the summons or summons shall be deemed to have been duly
given or served.
A person who has been appointed as an authorized
attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) may, in the case of proceedings of
the case, appear in person before the court or appoint another person
as an attorney.
In appointing an authorized attorney by executing a
general power of attorney without specifying any case pursuant to this
Section, it has to be signed and executed by the person appointing an
attorney in presence of, and certified by, any district judge if the
power of attorney is executed within the territory of Nepal, and any
Nepalese ambassador or consul general if it is executed in a foreign
country.
In making certification of a power of attorney pursuant to
sub-section (4), the photograph of the person who appoints and that of
the person who is appointed under the power of attorney shall be
affixed unto any part of the power of attorney, and duplicate copies of
their citizenship certificates or passports shall also be attached
therewith.
The fee of two hundred rupees shall be charged for the
certification of a power of attorney pursuant to sub-section (4).
159. Transfer of right in immovable property through authorized
attorney: (1) A person who, for any reason, is not able to appear in
person before the concerned office in order to sell or dispose of, or
exchange, or otherwise transfer any immovable property in which
he/she has right and ownership or execute a will to be effectively
immediately in relation to such property or to execute such a deed as
required to be registered pursuant to law may sell, dispose of,
exchange or transfer such property by appointing the authorized
attorney by executing the power of attorney setting out the reasonable
ground for his/her inability to appear in person.
In appointing an authorized attorney pursuant to subsection (1), the procedures referred to in sub-sections (4) and (5) of

Section 158 shall be fulfilled.
A person who has been appointed as an authorized
attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) shall carry out such acts as
required be performed on behalf of the person executing the power of
attorney, subject to the terms and conditions of the power of attorney
executed and delivered to him/her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a deed of testament or testamentary will cannot be executed
by appointing an authorized attorney.
160. Termination of status of authorized attorney: The status of
authorized attorney pursuant to a power of authority executed
pursuant to this Chapter shall ipso facto be terminated in any of the
following circumstances:
If the power of authorized attorney specifies any certain
act, purpose and period and such act, purpose or period is
completed or expired,
If the power of authorized attorney is so executed that it
shall cease to remain valid after the occurrence of any
specific event or circumstance or completion of such
event or circumstance, and such event or circumstance
occurs or completes,
If the person executing the power of attorney revokes the
power of attorney by publishing a notice in any two
newspapers of national circulation,
If the person executing the power of attorney or the
person appointed under such power dies prior to the
completion of the act set forth in the power of attorney,
If the concerned person of the property intended to be
transferred through attorney appears in person and
transfer the right in such property,
If a case is filed in the court a case between the person
executing, and the person appointed under, the power of
attorney, and the person appointed by the power of
attorney or any of his/her undivided family members in
relation to the property as referred to in the power of
attorney,
If the person appointed under the power of attorney gives
information in writing to the person executing the power
of attorney, thereby expressing his/her unwillingness to
act as the authorized attorney.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Interlocutory or Interim Orders
161. Petition to be made for issuance of interlocutory order: (1) Where
the claim of a plaint or memorandum of appeal shall be meaningless if
any act or action is not prevented immediately or if any act is not done
immediately in the course of proceedings of any case, or if any matter
is not maintained as it is in regard to any claim or demand of a case,
the plaintiff or appellant may make a petition, setting out that matter,
to the concerned court, praying for the issuance of an interlocutory
order on any matter.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"interlocutory order" means any order other than a decision or
judgment made in relation to a case.
If, upon hearing the petition received pursuant to subsection (1), it appears to be appropriate to issue such an order, the
court may, for the reasons to be recorded, issue an interlocutory order
on any matter.
162. Petition against interlocutory order: (1) A person who is not
satisfied with the following order issued by a lower court in the course
of proceedings of a case may make a petition to the court hearing
appeal from such court to uphold or withhold such an order within
fifteen days after the date of such order:
Order to hold parties on recognizance, take guarantee and
court fees,
Revocation of a complaint made to the judge against the
order of endorsement that the case cannot be registered
pursuant to Chapter-10,
Order issued upon determining the matters relating to
locus standi, limitation or jurisdiction in the course of
holding preliminary hearings pursuant to Chapter-11,
Any other order made in the course of proceedings of the
case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
any party to a case may make to the court hearing appeals, a petition
alleging that the time-limit has expired of any action taken by the
court or irregularity has been made by not performing the act required
to be done in accordance with law within the specified period, and
praying for the revocation such undue order.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
the court hearing appeal shall, as required, procure the report and
case-file from the concerned court and hold hearings.
If, in holding hearing pursuant to sub-section (3), if the
order made by the lower court seems to be undue or made upon
expiration of the time-limit, the court hearing appeal may, for reasons
to be recorded, uphold or withhold such an order or order to act in
accordance with law.
163. Provisions relating to the issuance of interim order: (1) A party
may, in the course of proceedings or in relation to an injunction
petition, pray for the issuance of an interim order, setting out that the
claims of the petition would be meaningless if any matter is not kept
in status quo in respect of any matter or claim of the case on any
matter pending the final settlement of such a case.
If an interim order is prayed for pursuant to sub-section
(1) and the court thinks it appropriate and necessary, the court may
issue the following order for a period until the petition is finally
settled:
To issue an interim order with specification of the period,
To make an order to summon the presence of the other
party to hold discussions on whether the interim order
issued pursuant to clause (a) should be given continuity
or not,
If it appears, from the discussions held in relation to the
interim order, that there exists a situation where the other
party has suffered loss, following the final decision of the
petition, as a result of the issuance of the interim order in
his/her favor and a commitment is writing is made to
bear compensation pursuant to the laws in force, to issue
a conditional interim order,
If the claim of a petition appears to be meaningless if the
matter of claim of the petition is not kept in status quo, to
keep that matter in status quo.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
a petition is made for an interim order but the court is of the opinion
that it is appropriate to made decision on a given matter, nothing shall
preclude the court from making the final decision on that matter.
The interim order issued pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
be deemed to have ipso facto been ineffective upon the final
settlement of the petition.
If an order is made to summon the presence of the other
party to hold discussions on whether the interim order issued pursuant
to sub-section (2) should be given continuity or not and discussion
cannot be hold on that day because of the petitioner, the interim order
shall then be inoperative.
The court shall assign the reason for issuing, or refusing
to issue, an interim order pursuant to this Section.
164. Revocation of interim order: (1) Any party may make a petition to
the same court for the revocation of an interim order issued pursuant
to Section 163 showing the reason that the interim order has been
issued upon ex parte hearing or that an opportunity has not been given
to that party to present his/her matters.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may summon the presence of the other party and hold hearings on that
matter.
If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court thinks it appropriate to revoke the interim order issued pursuant
to Section 163, the court may make an order to revoke such order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if
it appears appropriate to amend or alter the terms of the interim order
instead of revoking the same, the court may, for the reasons to be
recorded, amend or alter the terms of the interim order issued pursuant
to sub-section (2) of Section 163.
165. Compensation to be paid: (1) Where the interim order issued
pursuant to Section 163 has been revoked or its terms altered or
amended and any party has suffered any loss or damage being unable
to do any act or take any action as a result of the interim order prior to
such revocation, amendment or alteration, that party may make a
petition to the concerned court against the party praying for the
interim order for compensation, setting out the amount of such loss or
damage.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may summon the presence of the concerned parties in the court and
hold hearings on the matter.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the petitioner has actually suffered loss or damage as a
result of the issuance of interim order, the court may order for the
payment of compensation in consideration for such loss or damage.
Provided that no order may be made to make payment of
compensation in consideration of any remote or indirect loss or
damage.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the party
praying for the interim order shall pay the compensation pursuant to
that order.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Examination of Documentary Evidence
166. Production of documentary evidence: (1) The plaintiff or the
defendant, as the case may be, shall produce the originals and
duplicate copies of such documentary evidence related with the claims
as set down by the plaintiff in the plaint and with the pleas as set
down by the defendant in the statement of defense along with the
plaint or the statement of defense, as the case may be.
The court shall verify the original evidence submitted
pursuant to sub-section (1) with its copy and return the original
evidence to the concerned party.
The original returned pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
produced as and when the court so demands.
Any evidence not produced pursuant to sub-sections (1)
and (3) may not be taken in evidence in the concerned case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
in a case of which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or defendant,
the documentary evidence cannot for any reason be produced at the
time of filing or submission of the plaint or the statement of defense,
the plaintiff or the defendant may set down the reason and description
thereof in the plaint or the statement of defense that in which office
such evidence is or likely to be held.
Where description is set down pursuant to sub-section (5),
the court may, as required, itself procure and examine such evidence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if it is not possible to produce the original of any
documentary evidence before the court immediately, a duplicate copy
thereof shall be duly produced with the plaint or the statement of
defense, accompanied by the reason for the same.
167. Evidence to be mentioned: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Section 167, if the original or duplicate copy of any
documentary evidence is not available for the time being but such
evidence is in the custody of any person or organization, the plaintiff
or the defendant shall mention that matter in the plaint or the
statement of defense, as the case may be.
If the evidence is mentioned pursuant to sub-section (1)
and it is necessary to examine such evidence, the court may order the
concerned person or organization to produce the original of such
evidence before the court within such a period as specified by the
court.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), such
person or organization shall produce such evidence within the period
as specified by the court.
The court may fine the person or chief of organization
who does not produce the evidence pursuant to sub-section (3) with a
sum not exceeding five hundred rupees.
168. Request for time: (1) If, for any reason, it is not possible to produce
any documentary evidence at the time of filing of the plaint or
submission of the statement of defense and the plaintiff or the
defendant makes a request, accompanied by the reason for the same,
for time to produce such evidence, the court may, if it finds the reason
to be reasonable, give the time not exceeding fifteen days.
The plaintiff or the defendant shall produce such
evidence before the court within the time given pursuant to subsection (1).
Any evidence not produced within the time as referred to
in sub-section (2) may not be examined as evidence.
169. Request for leave to produce evidence: If any new and important
documentary evidence that was not in the knowledge of the plaintiff
or the defendant at the time of filing of the plaint or submission of the
statement of defense, as the case may be, comes to the knowledge or
is found/discovered and the plaintiff or the defendant requests for a
leave to produce such an evidence and the matter seems to be
reasonable, the court may grant a leave to produce such evidence and
examine it.
170. Return of originals: (1) After the production of the original and
duplicate copy of any documentary evidence pursuant to this Chapter,
the person producing such evidence shall be caused to sign the
duplicate copy of such documentary evidence.
The concerned officer of the court shall verify the
duplicate copy of the documentary evidence produced pursuant to
sub-section (1) with its original and certify the duplicate copy and
record it in the concerned case-file.
After recording the certified duplicate copy as referred to
in sub-section (2) with the case-file, the original of the documentary
evidence produced pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be returned to the
concerned person.
171. Not to examine evidence prior to submission of statement of
defense: No proceeding may be initiated to examine evidence
normally prior to the submission of the statement of defense or
expiration of the period for the submission of the statement of defense
upon the filing of a plaint, except in accordance with law.
172. To examine evidence: If it appears necessary to examine any such
document in evidence as maintained with a government office as
mentioned in the plaint or the statement of defense, an order shall be
made to examine it normally within a period of seven days after the
date of the submission of the statement of defense or after the date
upon the expiration of the period for the submission of the statement
of defense where such statement has not been submitted.
173. To examine evidence on issue to be decided: (1) On the due date
appointed for appearance of the parties of a case following the filing
of the plaint, the court shall inspect the plaint and the statement of
defense and all documents produced, in presence of the plaintiff and
the defendant and inquire the plaintiff and the defendant into
necessary matters and ascertain the issues admitted or denied by both
parties.
If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that both parties agree on the issues claimed by the plaintiff,
the court shall make decision on the same day.
If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that both parties disagree on the matters partly or fully, the
court shall frame the issues that are denied and to be decided and
clearly set out other additional evidence required to be examined in
that connection, order the production of evidence and proofs and
appoint the date for the examination of evidence and proofs.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no evidence may be examined on any matter other than the
matters relevant with the issues to be decided.
174. Power of court to produce deed: (1) The court may, at any time in
the course of proceedings of a case, order any person who is in
possession such a document which the party of the case has not been
able to produce or cannot produce as may be necessary to decide the
issues of the case, to produce the deed within the period as specified
by the court.
The court may order any person in possession of any
document that can be taken in evidence and is relevant with the issues
to be decided in a case to produce such a document before the court.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the
concerned person shall produce the deed in person or through any
other person before the court within the period as specified in the
order.
The court may fine the person who does not produce the
document pursuant to sub-section (3) or does not appear before the
court without showing a reasonable reason for the failure to produce it
or does not make a petition with a sum not exceeding five thousand
rupees.
175. Order of examination of evidence: (1) Except as otherwise ordered
by the court, in examining evidence on the date appointed pursuant to
the court order for the examination of evidence by the court, the
evidence produced by the defendant shall ordinarily be examined after
the examination of the evidence produced by the plaintiff.
If, in examining evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), any
party immediately raise any objection that any document or proof is
inadmissible in evidence or is irrelevant, the judge shall immediately
order as to whether such an objection is reasonable or not.
If, in making order pursuant to sub-section (2), any
document produced by any party is held to be inadmissible in
evidence or irrelevant, that matter shall be recorded in the case-file.
176. Power to cause document to be executed: (1) The court may, in
relation to any necessary matter related with the case as required to be
inquired with the parties of case, inquire it at any time in presence of
the plaintiff or the defendant and cause a document to be executed to
that effect.
Except on such matters as required to be tried, heard and
settled upon a plaint in accordance with law, the court shall try, hear
and settle any case to be tired, heard and settled upon any other
complaint by setting out the evidence of each matter required to be set
out by the plaintiff or the defendant, getting them to make depositions
and recording the same.
177. To make deposition whether document is genuine or forged: (1)
On the date appointed for the examination of proof and evidence, the
evidentiary document submitted by the plaintiff shall be shown in
original to the defendant and that of evidentiary document submitted
by the defendant shall be shown in original to the plaintiff, and the
contents to be read out to each, and if any party names a document as
a genuine, forged or fraudulent one, deposition to that effect shall be
taken and recorded.
If, in showing or reading out a document pursuant to subsection (1), a party is not able to immediately determine whether the
document in question is genuine, forged or fraudulent one and
requests for a time-limit, the court may give a time-limit not
exceeding three days.
Where a document bearing the signature of any person
other than the parties to the case has been produced and a request is
made by a party of the case for a time-limit in view of being unable to
immediately determine whether the document is genuine, forged or
fraudulent, a time-limit not exceeding fifteen days may be given to
make statement, accompanied by evidence, as to the genuineness,
forgery or fraudulence of the document.
The person who is to make deposition within the timelimit given pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be caused to make
deposition as to the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of the
document, and any deposition made by him/her shall be recorded.
Where a deposition to be taken pursuant to sub-section
(4) is made that the document is forged or fraudulent, depositions of
all parties to the case, if present on that day, shall be taken on that day
and that by any party who is not present on that day shall be recorded
on the day on which he/she is present.
Where the attorney or legal practitioner of any party is
making presence and it appears necessary to summon the presence of
the concerned party in person, the court may summon the presence of,
and take the deposition of, such a party in person.
If, in showing or reading out an evidentiary document
pursuant to this Section, the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of
the document cannot be ascertained, the court may send such an
evidentiary document to the concerned specialist for its examination.
178. Reading out for genuineness, forgery or fraudulence not required:
Any document that cannot be taken in evidence in accordance
with law is not required to be read out or shown for the purpose of
genuineness, forgery or fraudulence.
If a document produced by a defendant affects another
defendant, it shall be shown and read out to such affected defendant
and his/her deposition shall be taken, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 177.
179. Examination of evidence by court hearing appeal: If it is
necessary to adjudge a case of which the judgment examining court is
seized by way of appeal or otherwise by ascertaining whether any
document produced for evidence in that case is a genuine or forged
one and the lower court has adjudged the case without carrying out
that proceeding, the court hearing appeal shall procure the original of
that deed or document and take the deposition of the party.
180. To try, hear and adjudicate case by taking deposition in the same
case: A case that is a criminal case in accordance with law and has
arisen from the statement of defense or deposition of the defendant of
any civil case pending in any court shall be tried by taking deposition
for the same case-file.
Provided that the court trying only specific type of cases under
any specific Act shall try, hear and settle only such cases in
accordance with such Act.
181. To examine affected parties: If it appears from the study of the
documents attached with the case-file related with any case that any
matter to be adjudged in such a case will also affect any third person
or that such person is also found to be relevant with the case, the court
shall examine even such a person, provide him/her with a reasonable
time and opportunity to be heard and try, hear and settle the case by
holding him/her on recognizance based on the evidence produced by
him/her and by requiring him/her to appear on the appointed due date
as if he/she were the principal person.
182. Power to make measurement or map: (1) If it appears that the issue
should not be adjudged without making a map, survey or
measurement of any immovable property subject to dispute in a case,
the court may order for making the map or measurement of such
property.
In making a map or measurement pursuant to an order
made under sub-section (1), a date shall be appointed for both parties
to make presence at the place where the map or measurement has to
be made or a notice of such date shall be given to them.
Where a date has been appointed pursuant to sub-section
(2), one employee of at least non-gazetted second class serving in the
court, also accompanied by a surveyor, shall go to that place and carry
out such inspection, measurement and survey of the house, wall or
other immovable property as may be required to be so surveyed or
measured on that date, in presence also of both parties of the case, at
least one representative of the local body as far as available and at
least two local persons.
In making a map or measurement pursuant to sub-section
(3), such a map deed has to be got signed by the concerned party,
local person and representative of the local body and by the concerned
employee, produced before the court and recorded in the concerned
case-file.
If the parties do not show up in the place where such map
or measurement has to be carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) or
refuse to sign despite showing up there or if this is a case in which the
parties have not made presence on the date appointed for appearance,
such a map or measurement as may be required shall be carried out in
presence of the other persons mentioned in sub-section (4), and a
remark that the parties have been absent shall be mentioned therein,
and shall be signed by the employee deputed and by at least one
representative of the local body, produced before the court and
recorded in the concerned case-file.
If a representative of the local body who is required to be
present pursuant to this Section is not present despite a notice having
been given to him/her, any inspection, map or measurement meeting
the other requirements shall not be invalid only by the reason that
he/she has remained absent.
A map or measurement that fails to meet the
requirements pursuant to this Section shall be inadmissible in
evidence.
183. Power to inspect venue: (1) If it appears that it is not possible to
produce the subject-matter of a case actually before the court owing to
the complexity of the subject-matter of the case or it is necessary to
make direct observation or inspection of the place where the matter of
dispute or immovable property is situated, the judge shall make an
order, setting out the reason for the same.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall appoint the day in advance for such inspection, and the judgment
himself or herself or the technician or other employee deputed
pursuant to the order of court shall make such observation or
inspection.
If observation or inspection is made by a technician or
other person deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), such technician or
person shall prepare a report only on the matters relevant to the
subject-matter of the case and submit it to the court.

Chapter-16
Provisions Relating to Examination of Witness
184. Parties to cause presence of witness: (1)
The party of a case shall
cause the presence of any witness mentioned as his/her evidence on
the date appointed by the court for the examination of witness.
The evidence of a witness who fails to make presence on
the date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be taken in.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if the witness fails to make presence on the due date appointed for
causing the presence of witness owing to a circumstance as referred to
in clause (c) of Section 144 and the party makes a petition for the
appointment of another due date, and the petition is accompanied by a
recommendation by the concerned local body or any government
body certifying the occurrence of such a circumstance, the court shall
appoint another due date to examine such a witness no later than ten
days of the date of such petition.
185. Power to court to subpoena and examine witness: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 184, the court shall
issue a summons to any witness who must be examined in a case
involving the property of the Government of Nepal or public property
or public right, interest or concern, thereby ordering such a witness to
make presence before the court within fifteen days.
Where a summons is issued pursuant to sub-section (1),
such a witness shall make presence within the period specified by the
court.
A summons to be issued in the name of a witness
pursuant to this Section shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-13.
186. Power to examine witness through video conference: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is
not possible to produce before the court a witness required to be
examined pursuant to this Chapter because of the witness being highly
aged or physically infirm or staying outside Nepal, and any party of
the case makes a petition to the court for the examination of such a
witness through video conference and the court thinks the matter to be
reasonable, the court may make an order for the examination of the
witness through video conference.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned party shall cause the presence of the witness at the pace and
day appointed for the examination of witness through video
conference.
In making examination of the witness pursuant to subsection (2), the examination of witness shall be made or caused to be
made as if the witness present at the video conference were present
before the court.
In making examination of the witness pursuant to subsection (3), the court shall write down and record the deposition of the
witness on video conference and the matters of the video conference.
The record of examination of a witness through video
conference shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-14.
The expenses incurred in the examination of a witness
pursuant to this Section shall be borne by the party applying for the
examination of the witness through video conference.
187. Power to depute employee to examine witness: (1) If any party of
the case makes a petition to the court to go to the place where a
witness who is unable to appear before the court due to physical
infirmity is residing or staying and examine such a witness and the
petition seems to be reasonable, the court may order for the
examination of such a witness.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
himself or herself may proceed to or depute an office of the concerned
court to the place where such a witness is residing or staying, and the
witness shall be examined, or caused to be examined, by the judge or
employee, as the case may be.
If an employee is deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned employee shall proceed to the place where such a witness
is residing or staying and examine him/her.
The expenses incurred in proceeding of the judge or
deputation by the court of an employee to examine the witness shall
be borne by the person making petition for the examination of the
witness pursuant to sub-section (2).
188. Witness to be examined on due date appointed for parties: (1)
Except in cases referred to in Section 186 or 187, the court shall so
appoint the day for the examination of witnesses that such
examination is made on the due date appointed for the parties to make
presence.
In examining a witness, there shall be prepared a
deposition containing the matters expressed by the witness, and the
deposition shall be signed by him/her and recorded.
189. To take an oath: Prior to making a deposition by a witness who
appears before the court to make such deposition shall take oath
before the judge that he/she will state noting but the truth, in the form
specified in Schedule-15.
190. Deposition taken by judge: (1) The deposition of a witness shall be
taken down by the judge before the bench of whom the examination
of witness is referred to.
In examining the witness pursuant to sub-section (1), the
judge may seek the assistance of required employees to record the
deposition and examine the witness.
191. Witness to be examined on due date appointed: (1) Except in cases
referred to in Section 186 or 187, the deposition of all witnesses in
appearance at the court on the due date appointed for the examination
of witness shall be taken down.
Where, in making examination pursuant to sub-section
(1), it is not possible because of the time factor to complete the taking
down of the deposition of all witnesses in appearance on that day, the
due date for appearance shall, for reasons to be recorded, be so
appointed for the witnesses and parties that the deposition of
witnesses shall be taken down on the next day thereof.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"on the next day thereof" means the first day on which the court
remains open, immediately following the day of the examination of
witness.
192. Deposition to be certified: (1) The judge shall, in examining a
witness, put questions to the witness on the matters as required to be
set out by the witness and record in the deposition such questions and
replies made by the witness to such questions and also the description
of cross examination, if any, made in accordance with law.
After the recording of the description as referred to in
sub-section (1), the court shall ask the witness whether he/she has any
thing else to state on any matter and cause him/her to state such matter,
if any, and set down in the prepared deposition that the examination of
witness has been made in presence of him/her and attending parties of
the case or attorneys and cause it to be signed by him/her.
If the witness, parties of the case or attorneys refuse to
sign the deposition pursuant to sub-section (2), the witness examining
judge shall certify that matter as mentioned by any or all of the
witness, parties of the case or attorneys and record in the case-file of
the concerned case.
While examining a witness, the deposition of a witness
shall be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-16.
193. Remarks to be made and certified: If, in examining a witness
pursuant to this Chapter, the concerned witness does not give or
refuses to give answers to the questions asked by the judge or gives
answers to unrelated matters rather than answers sought by the
questions put to him/her, the judge shall make remarks thereof and
certify the same pursuant to Section 192.
194. Power to examine witness on commission/letter rogetory: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
witness required to be examined is a resident of another district and
because of his/her physical infirmity he/she is not able to appear in
person and it is not possible to procure his/her presence in the court
trying the case and take his/her deposition, and the concerned party
makes a petition, setting out such matter, to the court for the
examination of such a witness on commission/letter rogetory and the
contents of the petition seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
examine the witness on commission/letter rogetory.
interrogatories
required
asked
commission/letter rogetory pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be framed
in the form set forth in Schedule-17 and certified by the judge and the
commission/letter rogetory shall be sent to the district court of the
district where the witness is staying or residing.
Where a commission/letter rogetory is issued by the
concerned court pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall appoint the
due date for the concerned parties to the case to make presence before
the court examining the witness on commission/letter rogetory and
give information thereof to the concerned court.
Upon receipt of the commission/letter rogetory pursuant
to sub-section (2), the concerned district court shall prepare a
deposition containing the answer to each interrogatory of the
commission/letter rogetory upon fulfilling the procedures pursuant to
this Chapter as if the case were filed in that court, and the judge of the
concerned district court shall certify the deposition pursuant to

Section 192 or 193 and send it to the concerned court that has issued
the commission/letter rogetory.
In fulfilling the procedures of the commission/letter
rogetory pursuant to sub-section (4), the concerned district court shall
give information thereof to the parties of the case or attorneys and
appoint the due date for them to make presence and send them to the
case in which the case has been filed.

Chapter-17
Provisions Relating to Hearings and Judgment
195. Power to make judgment on matter as agreed: (1) On the due date
appointed for the plaintiff and the defendant to make presence after
the submission of the statement of defense, the plaint, the statement of
defense and all documents produced shall be examined in presence of
both parties and shown to them, and the plaintiff and the defendant
shall also be inquired into the matters tat are not clear, and the court
shall consider whether both parties agree or disagree thereon.
If, in making consideration pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that the defendant has admitted and agreed to the claims of
the plaintiff, the court may adjudge the case at any time.
196. Power to hold pre-hearing discussions of plaintiff and defendant:
(1) If the court considers it reasonable to hold pre-hearing discussions
of the plaintiff and the defendant in order to ascertain the matter to be
adjudged in the case pursuant to this Chapter, the court may, for
reasons to be recorded, order to hold such discussions.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall appoint the due date for that purpose and hold such
discussions.
The plaintiff, defendant or their attorneys and legal
practitioners may attend the meeting referred to in sub-section (2).
On the discussions referred to in sub-section (3), the
plaintiff and the defendant may present claim, counter-claim or
statement of defense and evidence in support or rebuttal of that matter
and their claims or pleas in order to ascertain the matter to be
adjudged in the case.
The court shall ascertain the matter to be adjudged in a
court from the discussions referred to in sub-section (4) and makes an
order to examine evidence if it appears that necessary evidence has to
be examined in that matter.
Where discussions are held pursuant to this Section, the
court shall maintain records thereof and attach the same with the casefile.
197. To hold hearings upon completion of examination of evidence: (1)
The judge shall, upon the completion of the examination of evidence,
hold the hearing and decide the case ordinarily within one month.
In holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
parties of the case may present their respective claims or defense and
pleadings on their own or through legal practitioners or attorneys
appointed by them respectively.
If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court makes an order to present pleading notes in order to clarify the
additional matters in the case, the parties of the case shall present
pleading notes in writing on their own or through legal practitioners or
attorneys appointed by them respectively.
198. To provide opportunity to enter into compromise: (1) If the parties
of a case that is sub judice in the court wish to enter into compromise
at any stage, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
the court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
shall read out the contents of the petition and the meanings and
consequences thereof known to the concerned parties.
If, upon reading out pursuant to sub-section (2), both
parties agree to enter into compromise, the court shall draw up a deed
of compromise in triplicate.
If, in reading out the contents of the deed of compromise
drawn up pursuant to sub-section (3) to the parties, the parties agree to
enter into compromise, it shall be caused to be signed by both parties,
and the judge shall make an order to certify that the deed of
compromise was executed in his/her presence, and one copy thereof
shall be attached with the concerned case-file and one copy each shall
be given to the plaintiff and the defendant.
Where a deed of compromise is executed pursuant to
sub-section (3), no plaint that the party in question is not satisfied with
the deed of compromise shall be entertained except a plaint that the
other party has not complied with the deed of compromise.
If transmission, registration or plotting of immovable
property has to be made pursuant to the deed of compromise, as a
result of the order made to enter into compromise pursuant to subsection (5), the court executing the deed of compromise shall, within
three days, ask the concerned office to carry out the act as referred to
in the deed of compromise.
199. Settlement of dispute through mediation: (1) If the parties of a case
that is sub judice in the court wish to settle the case through mediation,
they may, irrespective of the stage of the case, make a joint petition to
the court for the settlement of dispute through mediation.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and it
appears to be reasonable to settle the dispute through mediation, the
judge trying the case shall make an order to settle the dispute through
mediation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), if the court is of the opinion that it is appropriate to
settle any case that is sub judice in the court through mediation, the
court may, in consultation with the parties, order for the settlement of
the dispute through mediation by the mediator appointed by the court
itself or by the parties themselves.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the
dispute has to be settled through mediation in accordance with law.
If the dispute is settled through mediation pursuant to
sub-section (4), the parties shall make a petition to the court,
accompanied thereby by a deed of settlement of dispute through
mediation.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (5), the
court shall execute the deed of compromise between the parties.
The provisions relating to compromise as set forth in subsections (3), (4) and (5) of Section 198 shall also apply mutatis
mutandis to the settlement of dispute pursuant to this Section.
If an order is made for the settlement of a dispute through
mediation pursuant to this Section but the dispute cannot be settled
through mediation, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
to make presence and try, hear and settle such case in accordance with
200. Not to execute compromise or mediation: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 198 or 199, a case instituted upon the
Government of Nepal being plaintiff and a case relating to a public,
government or community property shall not be capable of being
settled by compromise or mediation.
Provided that nothing shall bar the entering into compromise in
such a manner as to maintain the public, government or community
property.
201. Withdrawal of claim: (1) In any case other than a case in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff, the party of the case may, in order
to abandon the claims made by him/her in the plaint, memorandum of
appeal or petition and withdraw such claims or to withdraw the plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition stating that he/she is not able to
prove the claims, make a petition to the court at any time prior to the
hearing of the case.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall make an order to grant leave to withdraw the claims or the plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition as requested by the petition.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
shall cross of the record of that case.
If the claims or the plaint, memorandum of appeal or
petition are withdrawn pursuant to sub-section (1), the same party
may not make a complaint against the persons made as opposite
parties in the same plaint, memorandum of appeal or petition on the
same matter.
202. Judgment to be made: (1) Subsequent to the completion of the
hearings pursuant to this Chapter, the judge shall make verdict on the
issue to be decided ordinarily on the same day of the completion of
hearings and record the same in the verdict book.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "verdict
book" means a book maintained in the court for the judge to record
precisely the matters decided on a case and the grounds for the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where an order is issued to submit a note of pleadings pursuant to subsection (3) of Section 197, verdict shall be made within seven days of
the receipt of the note of pleadings.
If the court, for reasons to be recorded, makes an order
that verdict cannot be made on any matters to be decided on a case
pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day given that the matters
involve complex legal or factual questions, the due date for
appearance shall be appointed to read out the verdict within fifteen
days in maximum.
Where the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section
(3), the court shall make verdict on the case on that day, record it in
the verdict book and read out the same to the parties.
203. Matters to be stated in judgment: (1) The judge shall set down the
judgment of a case based on the maters decided pursuant to Section
202 ordinarily within seven days.
The judgments set down pursuant to sub-section (1) state,
inter alia, the following matters:
The short description of the case,
The plaintiff's claims,
The defendant's contentions and defenses,
The evidence produced by the plaintiff and the defendant,
Maters adjudged upon agreement or disagreement
between the parties over the issues,
Points of pleadings made by the party or his/her law
practitioner on the matters referred to in clause (d) or (e)
or the main points of note of pleadings, if any, submitted,
Matters adjudged by the court and grounds for the
adjudging,
Relevant law relied on for adjudging the issue,
Such points of the judgment as required to be executed,
Matter whether the judgment is appealable or not.
A judgment shall be set down in the format set forth in
Schedule-18.
The judge shall sign and authenticate the judgment as
referred to in sub-section (3).
204. Prohibition on amendment to judgment: After the authentication of
a judgment by the judgment as referred to in Section 203, no
amendment shall be made to it, except correction of minor errors in
such a manner as not to alter the verdict.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "minor
errors" means such difference between a figure and word contained in
the judgment, error on the reference of any one of the names,
surnames and addresses of the plaintiff, defendant or witness and
minor typo or printing error as not to differ or alter the matters
adjudged and the verdict.
205. Deed to be executed on hearing of judgment: (1) Where a case is
heard and adjudged by the court, the judgment shall be read out to the
parties of the case, if they are present, and a deed shall be caused to be
executed by them to the effect that they have heard the judgment and
be attached with the case-file.
If a party is not present as mentioned in sub-section (1)
but his/her attorney is present, then such a deed shall be caused to be
executed by the attorney.
In the case of a party who is not present at the time of
reading out the judgment pursuant to sub-section (1), the court passing
the judgment shall, on its own or through the lower court, serve the
time-limit for appeal, along with the notice of judgment, in the form
set forth in Schedule-19, on that party within three days of the
preparation of the judgment.

Chapter-18
Provisions Relating to Suspension and Transfer of Cases
206. Power to suspend cases: (1)
Where any party to any case, out of
several cases filed in several courts, makes a petition to the court,
showing a reason that the disposal of one case cannot be, or ought not
to be, made until any other case is disposed of, or that judgment of
one case will have substantial effect on the judgment of any other case
or where the court deems that matter, on its own initiative, in the
course of proceeding, the court may order, on reasons to be recorded,
that such a case be suspended.
If an order is made to suspend any case pursuant to subsection (1), the court shall give information of that matter to the
parties of the case, and also give information thereof to the concerned
court in which another related case is filed.
Upon receipt of the information referred to in sub-section
(2), the concerned court shall, upon disposal of the related case filed
in it, give information thereof, accompanied by a copy of the
judgment, to the court suspending the case pursuant to sub-section (2)
within thirty days after the date of judgment.
If, upon the disposal of the case pursuant to sub-section
(3), the parties to the case are on recognizance and the due date has to
be appointed for the parties to appear on the court suspending the case,
the court shall appoint such date for the parties to make appearance
before the court suspending the case and send them to that court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, if
different courts hold divergent views on which of the cases sub judice
in such courts should be suspended, the courts shall make reports to
the court hearing appeals from the concerned courts.
Where a report has been sent pursuant to sub-section (5),
the appellate court shall make an appropriate order on that matter and
the concerned court shall act in accordance with that order.
207. Revival of suspended case: (1) If a case suspended pursuant to

Section 206 has to be revived and proceeded, any party of the case
may make a petition, accompanied by the reason for the revival, to the
court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
grounds appear to be reasonable, the court may revive and hear the
case suspended as prayed for by the petition.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if information is received that the case suspended in another
court has been adjudged or there is no reason to continue the
suspension of the case, the court shall revive and proceed the
suspended case.
In suspending the case, the parties on recognizance shall
be dispensed with the requirement to make presence on the appointed
due date. In reviving the suspended case, the parties on recognizance
shall be summoned by giving them a time-limit of seven days, and the
case shall be proceeded.
208. Powers to transfer cases: (1) If a court makes a report to the
Supreme Court, setting out the reason for any obstruction to or
hindrance with the settlement by the court of any case filed in it and
yet to be settled and the reason seems to be reasonable, the Supreme
Court may order another court of equal jurisdiction to proceed, hear,
try and adjudicate such a case.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such
a court shall proceed, hear, try and adjudicate the case pursuant to that
order.
Provided that an appeal against the judgment made by such a
court shall lie with the court hearing appeals from the court in which
the plaint was originally filed.
209. Power of Supreme Court to hear and adjudicate case:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if, on the
petition of any party of a case or the report of the concerned court in
which the case is filed, the Supreme Court is of the opinion that, in
view of the fact that the case involves some complex constitutional
question or legal question of public importance or concern or related
to interpretation it will be appropriate to have the case heard and
adjudicated or any constitutional or legal question involved in the case
decided by the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court shall, for the
reasons to be recorded, make an order to call for such a case and hear
and adjudicate it by itself.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
file of such a case shall be forwarded to the Supreme Court and
information thereof shall be given to the parties of the case and date to
appear shall be appointed.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Supreme Court may hear and settle such a case or decide any
constitutional or legal question involved in that case, and remand the
case-file to the concerned court for the disposal of the rest matters.

Chapter-19
Provisions Relating to Appeal
210. Appeal to lie: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, a
party who is not satisfied with a judgment made by the court of first
instance may make appeal to the concerned appellate court within
thirty days from the date of knowledge of the judgment.
The time-limit for appeal shall begin within thirty days
after the date of the deed executed to the effect of hearing the
judgment where a party of an appealable case or his/her attorney,
being present in the court, has heard the judgment, or after the date of
the service of the notice of judgment, if any, where the party has not
so appeared.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
even though a deed is not executed to the effect of hearing the
judgment or the notice of judgment made is not served, the party of
the case shall make an appeal within thirty days after the date of
receipt of the duplicate copy of the judgment of the court within one
year of the judgment of the case.
211. Circumstances where appeal cannot lie: Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 210, no appeal shall lie in any of the following
circumstances;
Where the time-limit has been expired without
submitting the statements of defense or without making
defense after the receipt of the summons or after the
service of the summons,
Where the case has been compromised or mediated,
Where the plaint has been withdrawn,
Where the plaint has been dismissed.
Provided that an appeal may be made in the case of the plaint
being dismissed unduly.
212. Requirement to pay court fees in making appeal: An evidence of
payment of the court fees leviable in making an appeal pursuant to
law shall be submitted with the memorandum of appeal.
Provided that where an appeal is tendered for registration with
the leave of court subject to the payment of the court fees at the time
of the judgment of the case, the appeal shall be registered despite that
an evidence of the payment of the court fees is not produced.
213. Matters to be stated in memorandum of appeal: (1) While making
a memorandum of appeal, it shall be made, accompanied by a
certified duplicate copy of the judgment, to the court hearing appeals
from the court that has made the judgment, stating, inter alia, the
following matters:
A short description of the case,
The court and judge making the judgment,
Details of the time-limit for making appeal,
Grounds on which the judgment is based,
Appeal pleas and grounds thereof,
Legal basis for making appeal,
Legal basis in support of the appeal pleas,
Appeal fees.
In making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal shall be
written in descent language, and be accompanied by necessary
documents proving the pleas of appeal.
The memorandum of appeal shall be in the form set forth
in Schedule-20.
There shall be charged the appeal fees of two hundred
rupees while making an appeal.
214. Appeal required to be made to court hearing appeal: (1) In
making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal as referred to in

Section 213 shall be prepared and registered.
Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
registration pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall examine
whether the matters referred to in Section 213 are stated in the
memorandum of appeal or not, whether it is made within the timelimit as referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) of Section 210 or not,
whether it is in the specified form or not, whether the fee as specified
by the court is paid or not and whether the court fees are to be paid or
not, and register it if it meets the requirements and give a receipt in
the form set forth in Schedule-3 to the concerned party.
If, in examining a memorandum of appeal pursuant to
sub-section (2), it does not seem to meet the requirements for any
reason, the concerned court shall, for the reasons to be recorded, not
register the memorandum of appeal and shall make endorsement on it.
215. Memorandum of appeal may be filed in court adjudging case: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 214, a memorandum
of appeal may also be registered through the court adjudging the case.
Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
filing/registration pursuant to sub-section (1), such a court shall file
the memorandum of appeal in fulfillment of the procedures as referred
to in Section 214.
The memorandum of appeal tendered for registration
pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be sent, accompanied by the
concerned case-file, to the court hearing appeal within three days.
If the appellant who has filed a memorandum of appeal
pursuant to this Section wishes to be on recognizance, the due date
shall be appointed for appearance in the concerned court hearing
appeal.
216. Appeal by government employee to concerned court: (1)
If any
government employee is to make an appeal on a case involving
his/her right, interest and concern and is not able to appear in person
in the court hearing appeal owing to a government business, he/she
may file the appeal, setting out the reasons, through such type of court
hearing appeal, if any, available in the area where he/she is in service
or failing such a court, through the district court in the area where
he/she is in service.
If an appeal is tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section
(1), such a court shall file the appeal in fulfillment of the procedures
as referred to in Section 214.
If an appeal is filed pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
filing the memorandum of appeal shall send such a memorandum of
appeal, along with certification of the filing of the memorandum of
appeal and the concerned employee making appeal is in service in that
area, to the concerned court hearing appeal within three days.
If a government employee making appeal pursuant to this
Section wishes to remain on recognizance, the court filing the
memorandum of appeal shall hold him/her on recognizance and send
information thereof to the concerned court hearing appeal.
217. Calling for case-file: (1) Upon the registration of an appeal in the
court hearing appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall call for
the case-file of the concerned case within three days.
If the case-file is called for pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned court shall send the case-file to the court hearing appeal
within three days of the receipt of letter.
218. To make order to respondent to make presence: (1)
After receipt
of the case-file from the lower court pursuant to Section 217, the court
hearing appeal shall, within fifteen days, hold hearings as to whether
the case has to be tried by summoning the presence of the respondent
as prayed by the appellant or not.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), it
does not seem that the verdict made by the lower court will be
reversed, the court hearing appeal shall adjudge as so held.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) and
in consideration of the case upon appeal, it seems that the verdict
made by the lower court may be reversed, the court hearing appeal
shall, for the reasons to be recorded, order to summon the presence of
the respondent for hearings.
219. Service of summons on respondent: (1)
Where an order is made
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 218, the summons as referred to
in that order shall be served, in the form set forth in Schedule-21.
The summons as referred to in sub-section (1) may be
served by the court hearing appeal itself or through the court making
judgment in the case originally in fulfillment of the procedures as
referred to in Chapter-8.
If the summons is served pursuant to sub-section (2), the
respondent may, if he/she so wishes, submit defenses in writing to the
court hearing appeal.
If the respondent so wishes, the case shall be tried, heard
and settled by holding him/her on recognizance.
220. Hearing of appeal: (1) After the service of the summons pursuant
to sub-section (1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall
appoint the day for hearing where the respondent is present and both
the appellant and the respondent are on recognizance and hear the
appeal on that day, and even though both parties or either party are/is
not on recognizance, the court hearing appeal shall appoint the due
date or day for hearing the appeal and hear the appeal on that date or
After the service of the summons pursuant to sub-section
(1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall hear the appeal
despite that the respondent is not present.
Upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
verdict shall be made as so be held.
While delivering an appellate judgment, it shall be made
in the format as referred to in Schedule-22.
221. Powers of the court hearing appeal: Upon hearing a case n the
appellate level pursuant to Section 220, the court hearing appeal shall
make any of the following decisions:
To uphold or withhold the judgment of the lower court;
To reverse partially or fully the judgment delivered by
the lower court;
Where the judgment has been made by the lower court
without examining such evidence as required to have
been examined, to make such examination by itself or to
order the lower court to make such examination,
If any particular matter required to have been adjudged
(fact in issue) in the case has not been adjudged, to make
such adjudgment itself or order the lower court to
adjudge such matter;
To make any consequential or incidental amendment to
the judgment of the lower court.
222. To exercise of powers of court of first instance: In trying, hearing
or adjudging a case on appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court
hearing appeal may exercise the powers exercisable by the court of
first instance.
223. Synchronization of hearings and judgments: (1) Where various
parties have made separate appeals against the decision made by the
lower court on the same case, hearings of all appeals shall be
synchronized and judgment passed as so held.
Even though, in making a decision pursuant to subsection (1), any appeal has already been decided for any reason, the
case shall be adjudged upon the remaining appeals as so held as if
such appeal were not adjudged previously.

Chapter-20
Revision and Review of Cases
224. Revision of cases: (1) If the concerned party makes a petition to the
Supreme Court within thirty days, excluding the time required for
journey, after the date of a judgment or final order, setting out that
such a judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court on a case
not appealable to the Supreme Court pursuant to law contains any of
the following circumstances, the Supreme Court may conduct the
revision of the judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court:
If the judgment or final order involves error in the
interpretation of the Constitution or law,
If any legal principle established by the Supreme Court
has not been followed or has been applied with wrong
interpretation;
If irrelevant law has been used;
If any government or public property is misappropriated
or any loss is caused to such a property or ownership or
possession of a person is established in an unauthorized
manner over such a property due to lack of proper and
exact evaluation of the evidence contained in the case file
of a case involving dispute relating to such government
or public property.
If a petition is received for the revision of a case pursuant
to sub-section (1), the Supreme Court shall conduct hearings on
whether the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in the
judgment or final order of the Appellate Court or not.
If, on conducting hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the judgment or final order of the Appellate Court
contains the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), the Supreme
Court shall order the presence of the other parties of such a case in
order to conduct the revision of the case.
If the other parties of the case appear pursuant to subsection (3), the Supreme Court shall also conduct hearing for revision,
also in presence of them, and pass judgment on the case.
225. Power to review: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Code, the Supreme Court may review its judgment or final
order in any of the following circumstances:
If the party has come to discover or know any evidence
or fact likely to materially affect the judgment or final
order only after the judgment or final order has been
made,
If it appears that the judgment or final order has been
passed contrary to the precedent or legal principle
enunciated by the Supreme Court prior to the passing of
the judgment or final order, as the case may be.
If any circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in
the judgment or final order made by the Supreme Court, the party of
case may make a petition, setting out the reasons, to the Supreme
Court for review within thirty five days of the knowledge by no later
than one year after the date of the passing of the judgment or final
order.
If, on examining the petition received pursuant to subsection (2), it contents seem to be reasonable, the Supreme Court shall
make an order to review the case.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Supreme Court shall not review its judgment or final
order in any of the following circumstances:
If the judgment or final order has once been reviewed in
accordance with law,
If the questions raised by the petition for review were
also raised in the Division Bench of the Supreme Court
and they were heard by the Full Bench because the
Judges were divided in their opinions thereon, and
decision was already made by addressing those questions,
If the case has already been settled by way of revision
pursuant
prevailing
prior
commencement of this Code,
If the judgment of the Appellate Court has been upheld in
the case reviewed pursuant to Section 224.
226. Case to be settled being confined to relevant matters: In
conducting the revision of a case pursuant to Section 224 or review of
a case pursuant to Section 225, the case shall be adjudicated being
confined only to such grounds and relevant matters as on which the
Supreme Court has made an order to revise or review the case, as the
case may be.

Chapter-21
Provisions Relating to Mutual Legal Assistance
227. Power to make order to serve summons: (1) If, on any case filed in
a court, any summons is to be served on any person who is living or
residing in a foreign country, the court may make an order for that
purpose.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall make a submission, accompanied by the following matters, to
the central body to serve such a summons on the person who is living
or residing in a foreign country:
Full name of the person on whom the summons has to be
served,
The country where the person as referred to in clause (a)
is living or residing, the local address of him/her and
other description setting out his/her identity (his/her
passport number, identity card number etc.),
If the summons cannot be served on the address of the
person as referred to in clause (a), the country of the
enterprise where he/she works or which he/she operates,
and the address thereof,
Details in relation to which case the summons has to be
served.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"central body" means any such body as may be designated by
the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
Where a submission is made pursuant to sub-section (2),
the central body shall translate the court order and the details in the
English language and make a request to the concerned country
through diplomatic channels.
If, in making a request pursuant to sub-section (3), any
treaty has not been concluded with such a country for that purpose and,
for the service of such a summons in the concerned country, any
assurance has to be made by Nepal to the effect that the summons of
similar nature issued by the competent court of such a country in the
future will be served in Nepal on the basis of reciprocity, the central
body may make such assurance through diplomatic channels.
If information is received from the country requested for
pursuant to sub-section (3) that the summons has been served on the
concerned person, the summons shall be deemed to have been duly
served on that person.
If the country requested for pursuant to sub-section (3)
refuses to serve the summons or such a country gives information to
the central body through diplomatic channels that the summons has
not been served for the reason that such a person could not be found
or identified, the contents of such summons shall be published in a
daily newspaper of national circulation in the country where such a
person is living or residing or in Nepal.
Where a summons is served pursuant to sub-section (6),
the summons shall be deemed to have been duly served.
228. Request may be made to effect service of judicial document issued
by foreign court: (1) If any judicial document issued by a foreign
court has to be served on any person who is residing or living in Nepal,
the concerned foreign country shall, pursuant to the order of such a
court, make a request to the central body through diplomatic channels.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"judicial document" means any such document like a summons, plaint
or statement of claims, petition or memorandum of appeal issued by
any foreign court.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the
following matters:
The foreign court making order to serve the judicial
document in Nepal,
Details of the case in the context of which such order has
been made,
Details of the judicial document to be served,
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary
details to identify, the person on whom the document
referred to in sub-section (1) has to be served,
Details of which procedure or manner has to be followed
to effect the service of such a judicial document.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) has to be
accompanied by a memorandum set down for the service of the
judicial document in the format set forth in Schedule-23 and the
document to be served.
The request and the judicial document to be served or its
authentic copy referred to in sub-section (3) has to be in duplicate.
229. Service of judicial document: (1) Upon receipt of a request referred
to in Section 228, the central body shall study whether the request of a
foreign court meets the requisite terms or not and whether any judicial
document can be served in Nepal accordingly or not.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
that the judicial document issued by such a foreign court cannot be
served in Nepal, the central body shall give information, accompanied
by the reasons for the same, to the concerned country through
diplomatic channels.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
appropriate to serve the judicial document issued by such a foreign
court in Nepal pursuant to the request by the foreign court, the central
body shall request the concerned court to serve such a document.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"concerned court" means the district court of the area where the
person on whom the judicial document has to be served is residing or
living.
If a court is requested by the central body to serve any
judicial document pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall proceed
to serve such a judicial document as if the judicial proceeding were
sub judice in that court.
In serving a judicial document pursuant to sub-section (4),
it shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.
If, in effecting the service pursuant to sub-section (5),
any judicial document has to be served in pursuant of any specific
procedure or manner as per the request of the foreign court and
request is made accordingly by the central body, the concerned court
shall also pursue such procedures or manner.
After the service of any judicial document pursuant to
sub-section (5) or (6), the concerned court shall prepare a description
of the service of such a document in the format set forth in Schedule24 and forward it to the central body.
If the details of service received pursuant to sub-section
(7) has to be translated into the English language as per the request of
the foreign court, the central body shall translate it and certify the
original copy received from the concerned court and the translated
copy and send the same to the requesting foreign country through
diplomatic channels.
230. Taking of evidence abroad: (1) If, on any case that is sub judice in a
court, it is necessary to take any evidence outside Nepal, the court
may make an order for that purpose.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall make a submission to the central body.
Where a submission is made by the court pursuant to
sub-section (2), the central body shall set down the details of evidence
to be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-25 and make a request to
the concerned country, through diplomatic channels, to effect the
taking of evidence by the concerned authority of that country.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a request has been made to effect the taking of an evidence
pursuant to this Section and the concerned foreign country has refused
to take evidence or the evidence has not been taken by the competent
authority of such a country, nothing shall bar the adjudging of the case
by examining the other available evidence by that reason only.
231. Power to take evidence as per request of foreign court: (1) If any
evidence has to be taken in Nepal in relation to any case that is sub
judice in any foreign court or body, such court shall make a request to
the central body through diplomatic channels.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) for taking an
evidence shall state the following matters:
The foreign court or body making request to effect the
taking of evidence,
Where the court or body requested to effect the taking of
evidence in Nepal is identified, details thereof,
Nature of the case in relation to which request is made to
effect the taking of evidence,
Details of the parties of the case and their attorneys or
representatives,
Details of the evidence or other judicial action to be
taken in Nepal,
If any witness has to be examined in Nepal, the name,
surname and address of such a witness,
If any witness has to be examined in Nepal by a letter
rogetory, the details of interrogatories to be asked to
him/her,
Whether the witness has to take an oath on making
deposition, the details thereof,
If any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
examination of any document, movable or immovable
property has to be made in Nepal, the details thereof,
Other necessary details.
232. Request to be in Nepali language: A request made to take evidence
pursuant to Section 231 shall be set down in the Nepali language.
Provided that if a request is set down in any foreign language
and it is not practicable to translate it into the Nepali language and,
upon showing the reasons for the same, the original copy in the
English language or its formal translation in English from another
language is attached, such a request shall be acceptable to the central
body or the concerned court, as the case may be.
233. To be sent to the concerned court: (1) Upon receipt of a request
referred to in Section 231, the central body shall study whether it is
appropriate to take evidence in Nepal or not.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
appropriate to take evidence in Nepal pursuant to the request by the
foreign country, the central body shall request the concerned court to
take evidence in accordance with the request.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"concerned court" means the following court to take the following
evidence:
Where any witness has to be examined or replies to the
letter rogetory prepared, the district court of the area
where such a witness or person is residing or living,
Where any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
examination of any movable or immovable property has
to be made or the description thereof prepared, the
district court of the area where such a property is situated,
Where details relating to any document has to be set out,
the district court of the area where the government or
non-government office or the person in custody of that
document is situated or is living or residing.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
that the evidence cannot be taken in Nepal as per the request, the
central body shall give information thereof, setting out details thereof,
to the concerned authority of the requesting country, through the
diplomatic channels.
234. The concerned court to take evidence: (1) If
central
request the concerned court to take evidence of any matter as per the
request of a foreign court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 233,
the concerned court shall proceed to take such evidence as if such an
evidence were taken on the proceedings of any case sub-judice in that
court.
Where a time-limit has to be given to any witness or
person to appear before the court pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall give the time-limit of a maximum of seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, and such a summons of timelimit shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.
In taking evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall take evidence being confined to such matter as
on which the witness has to be examined or to such interrogatories as
on which replies of letter regotary have to be prepared or to such
evidence, document or movable or immovable property as the
description of which has to be given, as per the request of the foreign
court.
If, in examining a witness or preparing replies of a letter
regotary or examining a document or evidence, the parties of the case
on which evidence is to be taken pursuant to this Section or their
attorneys or law practitioners wish to appear before the court, the
concerned may grant a leave to such parties, attorneys or law
practitioners to appear before the court at the time of taking evidence.
In taking evidence pursuant to this Section, the concerned
court shall apply the laws of Nepal.
Provided that if the foreign court has made a request to take
evidence of any specific subject by adopting any specific procedures
or manner on any specific matter and it is requested by the central
body to take evidence accordingly, the concerned court shall have to
take evidence accordingly.
235. To send evidence taken to foreign court: (1) The concerned court
shall send the evidence taken pursuant to Section 234 to the central
body.
If the evidence received pursuant to sub-section (1) has to
be translated into any foreign language as per the request of the
foreign court, the central body shall translate it accordingly and send
the same to the foreign court through diplomatic channels.
236. Expenditure to be borne: If any expenditure to be incurred in
serving a summons or taking any request in pursuance of a request
made by a foreign court pursuant to this Chapter, the requesting court
shall bear such an expenditure.
237. Recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments: (1) Any
judgment made by a court of any foreign country shall be recognized
in Nepal and may be enforced in Nepal, in the following
circumstance:
If such a judgment has been made by a competent court
with proper jurisdiction,
If such a judgment is enforceable in the concerned
country,
If such a judgment is final and not subject to review in
accordance with the law of the concerned country.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the judgment made by the court of foreign country shall not be
recognized and enforced in Nepal in the following circumstance:
If such a judgment seems to be deceptive or fraudulent
from procedural viewpoint,
If there has been filed and sub judice in a court of Nepal
a case between the same parties for the same fact and
purpose as on which such a judgment has been passed,
prior to the case being filed in the foreign court,
If the case referred to in clause (b) has already been
adjudged by a court of Nepal,
If the case referred to in clause (b) has been adjudged by
a court of another country, and such a judgment has been
recognized and already enforced or being in the process
of enforcement in Nepal,
If such a judgment has been passed without giving
adequate opportunity to any party of the case to represent
himself or herself fairly,
If such a judgment seems to have been passed without
following due process required for the proceedings of a
case.
238. Petition to be made for enforcement of judgment passed by
foreign court: (1) Any party who wishes to have a judgment passed
by a foreign court recognized and enforced in Nepal has to make a
petition, accompanied by the following documents, to the concerned
appellate court:
A full and certified text of the judgment,
If the judgment has been made in the absence of any
party of the case, the original or certified copy of the
document establishing that the summons has been duly
issued on such a party,
All documents establishing that the judgment has
fulfilled the terms as referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of
sub-section (1) of Section 237,
Where the judgment is not set down in the Nepalese
language, a Nepalese translated version of the judgment,
along with certification by the diplomatic or consul
representative or by a person authorized to do formal
translation of the judgment.
If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is received, the
appellate court, upon studying such a petition, is satisfied that the
judgment passed by a foreign court fulfills the terms as referred to in
sub-section (1) of Section 237 and that there is no reason to refuse to
recognize it pursuant to sub-section (2) of the same Section, the court
shall forward the judgment passed by the foreign court to the
concerned district court to recognize and enforce it.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"concerned district court" means the district court of the area/territory
where any amount in question, partition and foreclosure, as well, have
to be recovered, effected or made, as the case may be, pursuant to the
judgment.
239. Judgment to be executed by district court: If so written by the
appellate court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 238, the
concerned district court shall enforce the judgment as if it were one
passed by itself.
240. Compromise between parties: (1) If a petition is made for the
enforcement of a foreign judgment in Nepal pursuant to Section 238,
and the parties wish to enter into a compromise by enforcing the
judgment with mutual consent, they may make a joint petition to the
concerned court, setting out the details including the terms and
conditions of such compromise.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall effect compromise to enforce the judgment with
the consent in pursuance of the petition.
If compromise is effected pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned parties shall enforce the judgment in pursuance of the
mutual consent.
241. Non-enforcement in absence of treaty: (1) In order to serve a
summons issued by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, take
evidence in Nepal at the request of any foreign court or enforce a
judgment passed by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, there
shall be a bilateral treaty concluded between Nepal and such a foreign
country.
If any treaty has not been concluded pursuant to subsection (1), notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, a summons issued by such a court cannot be served,
evidence cannot be taken at the request of such a court or a judgment
passed by such a court cannot be enforced in Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
any foreign country makes a request, through diplomatic channels, to
the Government of Nepal for the service of a summons issued by a
court of a foreign country on any specific case or for the taking of
evidence as per the request of the court of such a country, and that
country gives assurances through diplomatic channels that it will
serve a summons issued by any court of Nepal on similar type of case
or take evidence as per the request of any court of Nepal in that
country in the future, the summons issued by the court of such a
country can be served or evidence can be taken at the request of that
court on the basis of reciprocity.
Where assurance has been made or summons served or
evidence taken pursuant to sub-section (3), the central body shall
maintain records thereof.
242. Non-enforcement: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, if it would be contrary to public order or sovereignty of
Nepal in serving a summons issued by a court of any foreign country
in Nepal or taking evidence in Nepal at the request of such a court or
enforcing a judgment passed by such a court or as a result of such
service or enforcement, no such summons may be served, evidence
taken or judgment enforced.

Chapter-22
Execution of Judgments
243. Records to be prepared: (1)
Where any judgment is made by the
court ordering the foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of
records, transmission, preemption, partition, recovery of amount in
question, realization of fine or court fees, the concerned court shall, as
soon as possible, prepare the records thereof and forward the same to
the bailiff section.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"amount in question" means any amount including compensation as
required to be recovered pursuant to the judgment.
Upon receipt of the records pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned employee shall create a separate case-file on it,
accompanied by a copy of the judgment, for the purpose of the
execution of judgment.
Where the records referred to in sub-section (2) are
prepared by the court hearing appeal, the concerned employee shall
forward the case-file, accompanied by the records, to the concerned
district court within a period of seven days of the preparation of the
judgment.
244. Execution by concerned district court: (1) The district court where
the plaint or complaint has been filed shall execute the judgment
passed on such a case irrespective of the level of court passing the
judgment.
The concerned district court shall execute the judgment
on a case originally tried and settled by the court hearing appeal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the district court executing the judgment cannot be
ascertained owing to the subject-matter of the case, the district court
designated by the court hearing appeal shall execute the judgment of
that case.
Provided that the judgment passed by any authority other than
the regular court shall be executed by the concerned authority.
245. Postponement of execution of judgment: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 243, the court shall postpone the execution of
judgment in the following circumstance:
If an appeal is made in a case which is appealable
pursuant to law, until the case is finally disposed on
appeal,
If no such appeal is made, until the period allowed for
preferring appeal is expired;
If an order is made to summon the presence of parties in
the court of revision of case pursuant to Section 224,
until it is disposed,
If an order is made to make the review of a case pursuant
to Section 225, until it is finally disposed.
246. Not to bar execution of judgment or deed of compromise:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
nothing shall bar the execution of judgment or deed of compromise in
the following circumstance:
In cases where a case is sub judice in a court in
pursuance of a petition made by a party to have a
judgment on any case reviewed or revised, except as
otherwise ordered by the court, to execute the judgment
passed on that case by the reason only that such a petition
has been made,
Even though a case to withhold a judgment or a deed of
compromise is filed by any one, except as otherwise
ordered by the court, to execute the judgment or deed of
compromise on that case,
If it appears that the property remaining as the subject
matter of a case will get damaged if the judgment of any
case is not executed immediately or if the winning party
of a case involving payment of compensation makes a
written commitment to bear compensation for any loss
caused to the other party if the winning party looses the
case on appeal subsequently, to execute such a judgment
by the court prior to the expiration of the time-limit for
appeal in such a case or prior to passing of judgment on
appeal,
If the parties of case agree on some matters of any case
that is sub judice in the court and the matters so agreed
can be separated and executed accordingly, and order is
made by the court to that effect.
147. Appointment of attorney: If any party of the case is not able to
appear in person in the course of execution of judgment, such a party
may assign and send an attorney for that purpose.
148. Opportunity to be given to enter into compromise or mediation:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
if the parties wish to execute the judgment through a compromise or
mediation, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
the court.
Provided that no petition may be made for compromise or
mediation on the matter of recovery of a government amount in
question.
If a petition is received from the parties for compromise
or mediation pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall specify the
period of execution and provide them with an opportunity to execute
the judgment through a compromise or mediation.
If the parties agree to execute the judgment through a
compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant to subsection (2), the court shall effect the compromise between the parties
in accordance with law.
If the parties do not agree to execute the judgment
through a compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant
to sub-section (2), the court shall have to execute the judgment in
pursuance of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter.
249. Parties to remain on recognizance: (1) Where the court of first
instance passing judgment on a case passes judgment ordering the
foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of records, transmission,
preemption, partition and recovery of amount in question, among
others and the parties of case are present in the court, the court shall
so appoint the due date for the parties to make presence for the
purpose of executing the judgment that the date falls after the period
of expiration of the time-limit for appeal.
If an appeal is made on the case by the date appointed
pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall discontinue the
recognizance of the parties.
Where a final judgment is made also by the court hearing
appeal to do as set forth in sub-section (1) and the parties of a case are
present in the court, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
to make presence for the purpose of executing the judgment and ask
the parties to make presence before the concerned court of first
instance and send the case-file to the latter court if the parties of the
case are not present in the court.
If the parties of case make presence before the court of
first instance pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall hold the
parties who are present on recognizance for the purpose of executing
the judgment.
If intimation is received from the court hearing appeal
that the parties are not on recognizance pursuant to sub-section (3),
parties are not present on the appointed due date or the case becomes
final upon the judgment of court not being appealed and the parties of
a case are not present in the court, the court of first instance shall issue
a summons of twenty one days in the form set forth in Schedule-23
for the parties to make presence in the court for the purpose of
executing the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if it is not necessary to hold any party on recognizance in the
course of execution of judgment, the court shall not hold such a party
on recognizance.
250. Power to execute judgment upon collecting additional fees: (1) If a
party of a case shows up for the execution of judgment after the
expiration of the time-limit for the undertaking to continue the case or
the extension of the expired time-limit, the court shall execute the
judgment by collecting the additional fees of ten percent of the fees
chargeable for the execution of judgment if it is within six months of
the expiration of the time-limit and of twenty five percent thereof if it
is within one year of such expiration.
If the party is not present to have a judgment executed
even within the period as referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall
close the proceedings relating to the execution of such a judgment,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
251. Continuity of case or extension of expired due date: (1) If any party
of the case dies in the course of execution of a judgment, his/her heir
may undertake to continue such a case pursuant to this Code.
If any party of the case expires the appointed due date in
the course of execution of a judgment, he/she may extend the expired
appointed due date pursuant to this Code.
252. Procedures for effecting foreclosure: (1) If, in the course of
foreclosing in pursuance of a judgment, the party shall be caused to
pay to the court three percent of the amount in question of the
property subject to foreclosure if such an amount is set out as fees
prior to the deputation of a commission for the foreclosure effected by
the court.
If the party entitled to foreclosure pays the amount to the
court within the time referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall on
the same day of payment of amount appoint the day on which a
commission to effect foreclosure is to be dispatched and give a notice
thereof to the parties and appoint the due date for them to make
presence at the place where the foreclosure is to be effected; and if the
person to allow the foreclosure is not on recognizance, the court shall
also give a notice of that matter to such a party.
In appointing the due date or giving notice pursuant to
sub-section (2), if the property to be foreclosed is a house or land, a
notice shall also be given to vacate such a house or land.
If the property to be foreclosed is in possession or
custody of a person other than the parties of the case, the court shall
also give a notice to such a person to appear at the place where the
commission is deputed.
The court shall depute a commission on the day
appointed pursuant to sub-section (2) and foreclose such a property in
pursuance of the judgment.
If the direction or side of any house or land to be
foreclosed in pursuance of the judgment is not set out, the court shall
effect the foreclosure of such a house or land by lot upon making
proportionate division in presence of the parties.
In effecting the foreclosure pursuant to this Section, the
court shall effect it in presence of the party obliged to allow the
foreclosure and the party entitled to the foreclosure or their
representatives and in witness of a representative of the local body
and at least two witnesses.
If the person obliged to allow the foreclosure or any other
person causes obstruction or hindrance to the foreclosure, the court
shall effect the foreclosure by using force as required.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the house or shop containing the property to be foreclosed
is locked up and the person in possession or custody of the house or
shop to be foreclosed is present, the foreclosure shall be effected by
asking the person to open the house or shop; and if such a person is
not present, a notice, in the format set forth in Schedule-27, shall be
affixed to the door of that house or shop, thereby requiring that person
to vacate the house or shop within fifteen days.
(10) If the concerned person does not open the key of the
house or shop within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (9), the
court shall after the expiration of such a time-limit effect the
foreclosure of the house or shop by breaking the lock of such a house
or shop.
(11) If any property is found within the house or shop in the
course of effecting foreclose pursuant to this Section, the court shall at
the same time prepare an inventory of the property and may take
control of such property.
(12) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
property taken in control pursuant to sub-section (11) within thirty
five days, the court shall auction such a property and immediately
hand over the proceeds of auction to the concerned person.
(13) If the concerned person refuses to receive immediately
the proceeds of auction made pursuant to sub-section (12), the court
shall credit such proceeds into the deposit account.
(14) If the concerned person shows up to receive the amount
within one year after the crediting of the amount into the deposit
account pursuant to sub-section (13), the court shall refund the
amount remaining after deduction of ten percent therefrom to such a
person.
(15) If the concerned person does not show up to receive such
an amount within the period referred to in sub-section (14), the court
shall credit such an amount to the government fund.
(16) Where foreclosure is effected once but any person makes
hindrance and does not allow the foreclosure of the property, the court
shall punish such a person with a fine of up to twenty five thousand
rupees or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months
for each instance, and again effect the foreclosure in relation to the
property previously foreclosed in accordance with the judgment. No
fee shall be payable for effecting foreclosure in such a case.
(17) If the property to be foreclosed is situated in another
territory, the court shall appoint the due date for the concerned parties
for effecting foreclosure and send the case file and parties to the
district court of such a territory.
(18) If a request is made to effect the foreclosure pursuant to
sub-section (17), the concerned court shall effect the foreclosure
pursuant to law and give information thereof to that court.
(19) After the foreclosure has been effected by the court
pursuant to this Section, the court shall give a documentary evidence
thereof to the party entitled to the foreclosure.
(20) The court shall complete the effecting of foreclosure
within six months after the presence of the parties in the court.
253. Procedures for effecting entry into and striking off of records and
transmission: (1) If, in the course of making entry into and striking
of records and transmission, in pursuance of a judgment, the party
entitled to obtain the same is in attendance in the court pursuant to

Section 249, the court shall write the matter to the office making entry
into and striking off of records and transmission for the purpose of
the execution of the judgment and send that party to that office within
twenty one days.
If so written pursuant to sub-section (1) or the concerned
party appears in the office, such an office shall effect the making of
entry into and striking off of records and transmission in pursuance of
the judgment.
If any party appears in the concerned office to obtain
entry into and striking off of records and transmission after the
expiration of the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (1), the office
shall effect the making of entry into and striking off of records and
transmission in pursuance of the judgment, by collecting the fees of
five hundred rupees for each year.
254. Procedures relating to preemption: (1) If, in the course of making
or allowing preemption in pursuance of a judgment, any party is on
recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall appoint the due
date for such a party to make presence to obtain the preemption of the
property subject to preemption or receive a deposited amount and
send the party to the office where the amount is deposited.
If both parties to obtain and allow preemption make
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the deposited amount to the person obliged to allow preemption
and deliver the deed of that property and receipt thereof to the person
entitled to obtain preemption.
If only the person obliged to allow preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the amount to him/her pursuant to sub-section (2) and deliver the
documents including the receipt of payment of the amount to the
person entitled to obtain preemption as and when that person makes
presence subsequently.
If only the person entitled to obtain preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall
effect the preemption in pursuance of the judgment and deliver the
documents including the payment of amount to him/her.
If preemption is effected by the office pursuant to this
Section, the person obliged to allow preemption shall receive the
deposited amount within thirty five days after that date.
If the person obliged to allow preemption shows up to
receive the deposited amount within two years after the expiration of
the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (5), the office shall return
the amount remaining after deduction of three percent of the deposited
amount therefrom to such a person.
If the person obliged to allow preemption does not show
up to receive the deposited amount even within the time-limit as
referred to in sub-section (6), the office shall credit such a deposited
amount to the government fund, as a governmental revenue.
255. Procedures for setting aside partition: (1) If, in the course of setting
aside the partition in pursuance of a judgment, the parties are on
recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall effect partition
by setting aside partition shares within six months.
If a judgment is made to set aside partition to more than
one coparcener and any coparcener is not present, the court shall serve
a fifteen-day summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-28, on the
coparcener failing to make presence.
If the concerned coparcener makes presence within the
time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2), the court shall set aside
partition shares and effect partition in presence of all coparceners.
If all coparceners entitled to receive partition do not
make presence within the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2),
the court shall set aside partition shares of the coparceners failing to
make presence and effect partition share of the coparceners who make
presence.
If partition is effected pursuant to sub-section (4), the
person failing to make presence within the time-limit shall not be
entitled to file a suit on the matter of making partition or higher or
lower grade or value of the partition share.
If partition is to be effected by sending a commission, the
court shall effect partition by sending an employee.
In the course of setting aside partition shares pursuant to
this Section, the coparceners who are obliged to give partition in
pursuance of the judgment or the coparceners who take custody of the
property set forth in the inventory, their representatives or other major
persons living with them in an undivided family shall produce the
property subject to partition and as set forth in the inventory.
If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property is not found or any major person living in the undivided
family does not produce all properties as set forth in the inventory, the
court shall serve a summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-29 on
the person giving, and taking custody of, the partition share.
If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property fails to make presence within the time-limit as referred to in
sub-section (8) or does not show the property subject to partition
despite making presence, the court shall effect partition as per the
inventory by opening any property, if any closed, in witness of a
member or representative of the local body and at least two
representatives.
(10) If the parties fail to make presence within the time-limit
as referred to in sub-section (2) or (8), the court shall set aside
partition shares and commence the partition proceedings in pursuance
of the judgment within three days after the expiration of the time-limit.
(11) If any party makes presence in the court after the timelimit given pursuant to sub-section (8) and the partition making is not
complete by that time, the court shall effect partition also in presence
of him/her.
(12) If, in the course of making partition, all properties are not
in order as set forth in the inventory, the amount of the shortfall
property shall be ascertained and shall be reimbursed from the
partition share of the partition giver or the person taking custody of
the property. If the partition share is not recovered even from such a
reimbursement, recovery shall be made from any other property
owned and possessed by such a person to the person receiving
partition, in consideration for such shortfall portion.
(13) If, in the course of effecting partition, the person
receiving partition or a major member living with him/her in an
undivided family refuses to receive his/her partition share and any
perishable property is subject to partition, the court shall auction such
a property. If the concerned person shows up to receive the proceeds
of such auction subsequently, the court shall return the amount
remaining after deducting fifteen percent thereof to him/her.
(14) If the persons receiving partition do not agree as to the
property subject to partition, the court shall divide such a property on
proportionate of higher or lower value or grade and effect partition by
(15) If any person does not show or produce the property in
his/her custody as mentioned in the inventory, the court shall fine that
person with a sum of five percent of the amount in question of the
property not so shown or produced.
(16) In a case where final judgment is passed holding the
plaintiff entitled to partition, if the other defendant coparceners also
make a petition to set aside and receive their respective partition
shares, the court shall collect court fees chargeable by law and set
aside such partition shares from the property as held by judgment and
cause the same to be provided to them.
(17) If the property subject to partition is situated also in
another territory, the court shall write to the concerned court to effect
partition of such property.
(18) If so written pursuant to sub-section (17), the concerned
court shall also effect partition pursuant to this Section and give
information thereof to such a court.
256. Procedures for recovery of amount in question: (1) If, in the course
of recovering amount in question in pursuance of a judgment, the
party entitled to recovery of amount in question is on recognizance
pursuant to Section 249, the court shall cause a deed to be executed by
such a party as to whether that party is willing to have recovery of the
amount in question or not.
If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
party entitled to recovery of the amount in question is not willing to
have recovery of the amount in question, the court shall, on the same
day, terminate the judgment execution proceeding and cross off the
records of amount in question.
If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
party entitled to recovery of the amount in question desires to have
recovery of the amount in question and the party obliged to pay the
amount in question is on recognizance, the court shall give a time
limit of a maximum of thirty five days to that party to pay the amount
in question as required to be paid in pursuance of the judgment.
The party obliged to pay the amount in question shall
furnish an amount equal to the amount in question with the court in
cash or through a good for payment cheque or any other instrument
within the time given pursuant to sub-section (3).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the party entitled to recovery of amount in question may make a
request to the court to have recover of the amount in question from
any property of him/her.
If the party liable to recovery of amount in question is not
present in the court or despite being present refuses to pay the amount
in consideration of the amount in question or fails to show a property
pursuant to sub-section (5), the party entitled to recovery of the
amount in question may, showing the property of the party liable to
pay the amount in question, make a petition to the court to have the
recovery of the amount in question from such a property.
If, in recovering the amount in question pursuant to this
Section, any property has to be attached, the court shall attach such a
property as required and effect the recovery of the amount in question
by also auctioning such a property as required.
If the proceeds of auction sale of the property made
pursuant to sub-section (7) exceed the amount in question, the court
shall immediately return such excess amount to the party liable to pay
the amount in question if he/she is present.
If the concerned party refuses to receive the amount
pursuant to sub-section (8), the court shall credit that amount into the
deposit account.
(10) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
amount credited into the deposited account within two years after the
date of crediting thereinto, that amount shall be paid to the
government fund, as a governmental revenue.
(11) If the party liable to pay the amount in question is living
or residing in another territory, the court shall write to the concerned
court to effect recovery of the amount in question.
(12) If so written pursuant to sub-section (11), the concerned
court shall also effect recovery of the amount in question pursuant to
this Section and give information thereof to such a court.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the party liable to recovery of amount in question discovers
the concealment or hiding of any property by the party obliged to pay
the amount in question and makes a petition showing the same while
the party obliged to pay the amount in question is alive, the court shall
auction the property and effect the recovery of amount up to the extent
of the amount in question to which he/she is entitled.
(14) The court shall, in consideration for effecting the
recovery of amount in question pursuant to this Section, collect the
fees of three percent of such amount in question from the party
entitled to recovery of amount in question.
257. Property subject to confiscation: (1) In making confiscation of
entire property pursuant to section 256, also the partition shares of
those who are above twelve years of age and have not separated bread
and board and have lived together and enjoyed such a property or of
those who, despite having obtained their respective partition shares or
separated bread and broad, have lived together while enjoying that
property shall be subject to the confiscation of entire property.
In making confiscation of entire property pursuant to
sub-section (1), the following property shall be set aside:
If any property is in the form of a personal property of a
person other than the person subject to confiscation of
entire property, such a property,
Up to three pairs of clothes and up to three pairs of shoes
to be put on by the person subject to confiscation of
entire property and his/her undivided family members,
Such bare cooking and dining utensils, pots and bare
quilt and mattress as required for the person subject to
confiscation of entire property and his/her undivided
family members,
Such books as required for the undivided family of the
person subject to confiscation of entire property to impart
education,
Such food as required to maintain livelihood of the
person subject to confiscation of entire property and
his/her undivided family members for up to three months
in maximum,
Bare inputs, tool or arms related with the occupation or
employment of the person subject to confiscation of
entire property and his/her undivided family members,
One yoke of oxen for farming.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
setting aside the property pursuant to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and
(g) of that sub-section, no property valued at more than thirty
thousand rupees shall be so set aside.
If the amount in question is not recovered in full even
upon making confiscation of entire property pursuant to sub-section
(2), no claim shall be made against other family members.
258. Imprisonment for amount in question or fine: (1) If the amount in
question is not recovered in full even from the auction sale pursuant to
sub-section (7) of Section 256 and the party entitled to recovery of
amount in question wishes to subject the party liable to pay the
amount in question to imprisonment and makes a petition for the same
within seven days of the auction sale of property, the court shall
execute a memorandum thereof and imprison the party liable to pay
the amount in question in accordance with law.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall convert the remaining amount in question into
imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees a day, and imprison
the party liable to pay amount in question equal thereto.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
no person shall be so imprisoned for more than four years in the case
of an amount in question of the Government of Nepal or a public body
which is owned or controlled by the Government of Nepal in full or
majority and for more than two years in the case of an amount in
question of a particular person or other body.
If, in subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section
(1), the amount in question is less than or remains less than three
hundred rupees, the concerned person shall be subjected to
imprisonment for one day for such an amount.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person wishing to effect such imprisonment shall bear the ration
expenses as chargeable pursuant to law.
In subjecting to imprisonment for a fine, one shall be so
imprisoned at the rate of one hundred rupees a day.
Prior to subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to this
Section, the concerned person shall be given a reasonable time to
present his/her statements.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, where a person in default of payment of the remaining
amount in question is subjected by order of the court to imprisonment
at the request of the party for the remaining amount in question not
recovered, no claim may be made again on that matter.
259. In the event of death of person liable to pay amount in question:
If the person liable to pay the amount in question dies prior to
the recovery of such amount in question, the amount in question shall
be recovered from the property in which he/she has right.
If the amount in question is not recovered from the
property in which he/she has right, the shortfall amount in question
shall be recovered from the person who inherits his/her property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
recovering the amount in question from the inheritor, no amount in
excess of that inherited by him/her shall be recovered.
260. Concession in fine: If a person who is sentenced to a fine pursuant to
a judgment pays the fine immediately or within sixty days of the date
of passage of judgment, the person shall enjoy twenty percent
concession in the fine imposed on him/her.
261. Execution of deed of compromise: (1) If any deed of compromise is
so executed that any act has to be done or caused to be done by any
government body, the court shall write to the concerned office to do
the act set forth in the deed of compromise, within three days of the
execution of the deed of compromise.
Even though, in a case involving more than one plaintiff
or defendant, all parties are not present for the execution of the deed
of compromise, the deed of compromise shall be executed after the
expiration of the time-limit. In so executing the deed of compromise,
the interest of the person who does not show up for such compromise
shall also be protected.
262. Period to get return of court fees, deposits and expenses: (1)
Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the concerned person
shall get return of such court fees and deposits as held to be retuned
pursuant to judgment within one year after the date of knowledge of
the final judgment.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the person
entitled to get or return of the proceeds of auction sale shall receive
such amount within three months after the date of auction sale.
If the concerned person does not receive the court fees,
deposits or amounts within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (1)
or (2), the person shall not be entitled to get return of such amount
subsequently.
After the expiration of the time-limit referred to in subsection (2), such deposits shall be credited to the government account.
263. Fees chargeable for the execution of judgment: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the court shall collect the fees
at the rate of ten percent from the recipient of any amount the
payment of which has been effected by the court pursuant to a
judgment or any other amount and the fees at the rate of five percent
from the payer of such amount.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no fees shall be charged for such specification of the deadline for
repayment of a loan, provision of a document or division of property
between or among creditors as effected by the court.
264. Complaint may be made: (1) A concerned person who is not
satisfied with an act or action done or taken by any employee in the
course of execution of a judgment may make a complaint with the
judgment of the same court within fifteen days.
A person who is not satisfied with a decision made on the
complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) may make a petition to the
court hearing appeal.
A complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) and a
petition made pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within
one month and two months, respectively.
265. Proceeding not to be void by the reason only the absence of
representative: (1) If any proceeding has to be carried out in
presence of a member or representative of the local body or to be
signed by him/her pursuant to this Chapter and such a member or
representative does not show up despite serving a written notice for
his/her presence, the proceeding may be carried out or caused to be
carried.
Any proceeding otherwise duly carried out shall not be
void merely by the reason that a member or representative of the local
body was not present or refused to sign pursuant to sub-section (1).
266. Power to institute action or impose punishment on contempt: (1)
It shall be the duty of the parties of a case to assist in the execution of
judgment pursuant to this Chapter.
The court may institute action on contempt of court
against a person who hinders the execution of judgment in accordance
with law or impose punishment of a fine of up to one thousand rupees
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or both on
such a person.
267. Employee entitled to incentive: (1) If a government employee who
is deputed for the recovery of a fine imposed or government amount
in question in pursuance of judgment does not wish to receive the
amount for daily and travel allowance, the employee shall be entitled
to an incentive allowance of thirty percent of the amount recovered.
The bailiff (Tahashildar) shall be entitled to seven
percent of the amount recovered pursuant to sub-section (1).
The allowance or amount as referred to in sub-sections
(1) and (2) shall be chargeable on the amount of fine or government
recovered.
If any person other than a government employee has
recovered the government amount in question or fine pursuant to this
Section, the amount as referred to in sub-section (2) may be provided
that person as if he/she were a government employee.

Chapter-23
Provisions Relating to Civil Cases in which Government of Nepal
is Plaintiff or Party
268. Investigation and filing of civil cases in which Government of
Nepal is plaintiff: (1) A person who intends to institute a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case which is defined as a civil case
by the laws in force shall have to make a petition in writing or
information orally, setting the evidence which is in his/her custody or
which is available to the best of his/her knowledge and information in
relation to such a case to the authority specified by the Government of
Nepal by publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette or to the concerned
Landreform Officer where such authority has not been so specified.
Where information orally is made pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned authority shall set down the matters of that person
in the form of a petition and get him/her to sign that document.
The concerned authority shall, as required, take
measurement and mapping of the house or land related with the case
or make investigation into other necessary matters, and shall, having
regard to the time required to make decision to or not to institute the
case and if decision is made to institute the case, the time required to
frame a plaint and file case, forward the originals of documents in the
case file and one set of duplicate copies thereof, accompanied by the
evidence collected and his/her opinion, to the concerned District
Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute case, in
advance of at least fifteen days of the date of expiration of limitation.
Even though a petition is not made by any person
pursuant to sub-section (1), if the concerned authority himself or
herself sees any reason to institute a case as referred to in sub-section
(1), he/she has to collect necessary evidence, complete the procedures
as referred to in sub-section (3) and forward the case file to the
Government Attorney of the concerned district.
The Government Attorney shall study the case file
received pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4) and decide to or not to
institute the case.
If decision is made to institute the case pursuant to subsection (5), the Government attorney shall frame a plaint and file it,
accompanied by the evidence, in the concerned court.
If decision is made not to institute the case pursuant to
sub-section (5), the Government Attorney shall return the received
case file and evidence to the concerned authority.
269. Case to be instituted as Government of Nepal being plaintiff: The
cases set forth in Schedule-30 shall be instituted as the Government of
Nepal being plaintiff in such cases.
Provided that Section 91 shall apply to the matters in which
plaint has to be filed pursuant to that Section.
270. In the event of revelation that person is to institute case: (1) If, in
studying the case file pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 268, it is
revealed that the case is not one that is to be instituted as the
Government of Nepal being plaintiff but that is to be instituted upon
making complaint by the aggrieved person himself or herself in
accordance with law, the Government Attorney shall make decision
accordingly and inform the authority who has forwarded the case file
to give a notice indicating that matter to the concerned person.
The limitation as referred to in law shall, in the case of
the concerned person, be counted from the date of receipt of
information pursuant to sub-section (1).
272. Provisions relating to institution of other civil cases: (1) The
authority, if any, specified by the concerned law for the institution of
or collection of evidence on any civil case other than that set forth in
Schedule-30, and the concerned chief of office, where such an
authority has not be specified, shall so submit the case file and
evidence, accompanied by his/her opinion, to the concerned
Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute the case that
the limitation for filing the plaint does not get expired.
Upon receipt of the case file pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Government Attorney shall make decision to or not to institute the
case, and if so decided as to institute the case, shall also mention as to
whom the case is to be instituted against, on which matter and under
which law and send the case file back in a manner that the limitation
for filing the case does not get expired.
If decision is made by the Government Attorney to
institute the case pursuant to sub-section (2), the authority who is
competent by law to that effect shall frame a plaint, sign it and file the
case in the concerned court within the limitation, and a copy of the
case file of such a case has to be provided to the Government
Attorney.
273. Provision relating to limitation: (1) If a lawsuit is to be filed on
behalf of the Government against any person on any civil matter, the
lawsuit has to be filed within the limitation if any specified in this
Code and other laws on that matter, and if no limitation has been so
specified, within two years after the date of knowledge to the
Government of Nepal of the occurrence of the cause of action.
Provided that if this Code or the other law provides that there is
no limitation to file a lawsuit and that a lawsuit may be filed any time,
the lawsuit may be filed any time.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), when the concerned
authority of the Government of Nepal comes to know the matter, the
Government of Nepal shall be deemed to be in knowledge of the
matter.
274. Provisions relating to examination of witness or submission of
evidence: (1) A person who gives information on a case set forth in
Schedule-30 shall be a witness of the plaintiff side.
The concerned authority shall arrange to cause the
presence or submission of a witness or evidence, on a case set forth in
Schedule-30 and any other civil case in which the Government of
Nepal is concerned, through the Government Attorney on the day as
appointed by the court.
The Government Attorney shall cause the examination of
witnesses and submission of evidence on a case set forth in Schedule30 and any other civil case in which the Government of Nepal is
concerned.
If any witness must be examined on a case set forth in
Schedule-2, the witness may be summoned and examined as if he/she
were a witness that must be summoned and examined on a criminal
case.
275. Government Attorney to make pleadings and defense: (1) The
Government Attorney shall make pleadings and defense on a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case that is defined by any law as to
be a state case.
If, except as mentioned in sub-section (1), it is so
requested by the concerned body in relation to a case in which the
Government of Nepal is made an opposite party or a civil case which
has been instituted as the Government of Nepal being a plaintiff, the
Government Attorney may make pleadings and defense.
276. Time limit to be given: (1) The court shall give a time-limit of
seventy days for making an appeal on a case set forth in Schedule-30.
If the concerned party expires the time limit pursuant to
sub-section (1) and makes an application showing a reasonable reason
to the court, the court may extend the time limit of up to thirty days in
relation the time limit that is extendable pursuant to Chapter-8.
277. Authority to make appeal, revision or review petition: (1) If it is
required to make an appeal, revision or review petition on a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and on a civil case which is defined by any law
as the Government of Nepal being plaintiff, the concerned
Government Attorney shall make such an appeal or petition.
If, except that set forth in sub-section (1), it is required to
make an appeal, revision or review petition or other relevant petition
on a civil case in which the Government of Nepal is a party or
opposite party, the concerned authority or chief of office himself or
herself shall make such an appeal or petition.
Provided that if the concerned authority or chief of office so
writes, the concerned Government Attorney may make an appeal,
revision or review petition or other relevant petition.
278. Procedures for filing lawsuit against the Government of Nepal:
(1) If it is required to make a lawsuit against the Government of Nepal
on a civil case, the concerned person shall give a notice thereof to that
office or the chief of that office against which the lawsuit has to be
made.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office or chief of that office shall have to obtain
consultation or clearance of another office or body wherever so
required.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1) and
there is any reason why the lawsuit should not have been made on that
matter, the concerned office or chief of that office shall give
information thereof, along with clear reason for the same, to the
concerned person within thirty days after the date of receipt of
information pursuant to that sub-section.
If no information is given within the period as referred to
in sub-section (1) or the said reason why the lawsuit should not have
been made is not reasonable, the concerned person may file a lawsuit
within thirty five days after the date of receipt of such information.
279. Application of Code and law on other matters: This Chapter shall
apply to the matters set forth in this Chapter, and the other Chapters
and law shall apply to the other matters not set forth in this Chapter, in
relation to civil cases in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or
party.

Chapter-24
Miscellaneous
280. Compensation to be determined: (1) If, on a case in which
compensation may be obtained pursuant to law for any loss or damage
caused to a person by the violation of right or interest of that person,
that person makes a claim for compensation, the court shall, in
deciding the case, determine the compensation.
In determining the compensation pursuant to sub-section
(1), the following matters may be taken into consideration except as
otherwise provided by law for the determination of compensation:
Actual loss or damage caused from the violation,
Loss in income caused from the violation,
Additional loss resulted from the violation.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in determining the compensation, compensation shall be
determined only on the basis of the actual loss resulted from the
violation of the right or interest of any person and the actual loss
resulted or likely to result from that cause, and compensation may not
be determined on remote matters.
281. Guardian may file case with the leave of court: (1) In making or
submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or
petition on behalf of a minor who has not attained the age as referred
to in law, an infirm person due to old age despite attaining the age, a
person who is blind or dumb or a person who is insane, the guardian
of such a person may, with the leave of the court upon a separate
petition, along with the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
appeal or petition, make or submit the plaint, statement of defense,
memorandum of appeal or petition.
There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
person is a minor, a person is inform due to old age despite attaining
the age, is a blind, dumb or insane or not, pursuant to sub-section (1),
and if so proved, the guardian may make or submit a plaint, statement
of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.
If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
petition on the same day as on which the petition is made for leave.
282. Institution of case on behalf of disappeared person: (1) In making
or submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal
or petition on behalf of a disappeared person, the heir to such a person
may, with the leave of the court upon a separate petition, along with
the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition,
make or submit the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
appeal or petition.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"disappeared person" means a person who has left the house without
information since consecutive three years ago or who has gone abroad
but it is uncertain that he/she will return to Nepal.
There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
person is a disappeared person or not, pursuant to sub-section (1), and
if so proved, the heir may make or submit a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.
If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
petition within fifteen days after the making of petition for leave.
The provision of limitation shall not apply in the case as
referred to in sub-section (3).
283. Undertaking to accept case: (1) Where a case is being proceeded
with any court upon a plaint or memorandum of appeal being filed by
person, and any party of the case dies or becomes of unsound of mind
or disappears prior to the judgment on that case and consequently the
time-limit and due date appointed by the court gets expired, the heir to
that party may make a petition to the court, undertaking to accept the
case, for the extension of the time-limit and due date, within twenty
one days from the date of his/her death, being of unsound mind or
disappearance, excluding the time required for journey.
If, upon examining a petition made pursuant to subsection (1), the contents seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
allow to undertake to accept the case and to extend the expired timelimit or due date.
284. Hearing of cases to be conducted in open bench: (1) The court shall
conduct hearing of cases in open bench.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
any party of the case makes a petition setting out the reasons for
conducting in camera the hearing of a case of family relation,
establishment of relation and divorce, and the request of petition
seems to be reasonable or if the court itself deems that it is appropriate
to conduct in camera the hearing of any case, the court shall make an
order to conduct in camera the hearing of the case.
Where an order is made to conduct in camera the hearing
of a case pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall prohibit the
access of any person other than the parties of that case or their
attorneys, law practitioners appointed by the parties or such other
persons or employees as the judge considers necessary.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the court considers it reasonable to prevent the access of
any person for the public security reason, the court may prohibit the
access of such person to the bench.
285. Requirement to make proceeding in presence of parties: In
conducting hearing of cases pursuant to Section 271 or deciding issues
to be settled, such proceeding shall be conducted in presence of the
parties.
Provided that even if any party is not present on the due date
appointed for the hearing of a case, nothing shall be deemed to bar the
deciding, and reaching the verdict on, the case.
286. Priority order of trying cases: (1) The court shall proceed, hear and
settle cases as per the following order of priority:
A case in which a disabled or a minor is a party,
A case in which a physically infirm person or aged
having attained more than seventy five years of age is a
party,
A case relating to name-giving function or settlement of
relationship,
A case relating to alimony,
A case relating to divorce,
A case registered earlier according to the order of
registration of cases.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
if there are cases of more than one nature in the same order, the case
registered earlier shall be proceeded, heard and adjudicated first.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
and (2), the court may, in view of the gravity and propriety of any
case, proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case by according priority to
287. Judge not to try case involving conflict of interest: (1) No
judge
shall, in proceeding, hearing and adjudicating cases pursuant to this
Code, proceed, hear and adjudicate the following case:
A case to or in which his/her right, interest or concern or
that of his/her close relative is involved,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“close relative” means a person who is in the order of
priority to inherit his/her property upon succession, in
accordance with law, maternal uncle, maternal aunt,
mother's elder sister, mother's younger sister, father's
elder brother, father's younger brother, mother-in-law,
father-in-law on the side of husband or wife, father’s
sister, father’s sister's husband, elder brother-in-law,
younger
brother-in-law,
sister-in-law,
elder
sister,
younger sister, daughter, son-in-law, nephew, niece's
husband, or any person residing in an undivided family
of such relative person.
A case in which he/she was an attorney, law practitioner
or witness at any time,
A case which was decided by himself or herself as the
judge in any court or in which he/she made final order,
A case in which he/she has given an opinion on whether
to institute it or not at any time,
A case in which he/she or his/her undivided family
member has a conflict of interest substantially for any
other reason.
If there appears any circumstance as referred to in subsection (1), the case hearing judge shall make an order setting out the
reason for not hearing it.
If any judge proceeds to try, hear or settle any case in
breach of sub-section (1), any party may make a petition,
accompanied by necessary evidence, for not so proceeding, hearing or
adjudicating the case.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (3), the
case trying judge shall, before proceeding, hearing or adjudicating the
case, ascertain whether the request or claim of such a petition is
reasonable or not, and make an order to that effect if the judge should
not hear the case.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (4),
such case shall be proceeded, heard or adjudicated by another judge in
the same court, and failing such a judge, the case-file, accompanied by
the reasons therefor, shall be sent to the nearby court of same level to
proceed, hear and adjudicate the case, and due date shall also be
appointed for the parties to make presence in that court.
If the case-file is received pursuant to sub-section (5),
such a court shall also proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case
despite that it is not within its jurisdiction.
288. Acts to be carried out by judge himself or herself: (1) The
following acts, out of the acts to be carried out by the court pursuant
to this Code, shall be carried out by the judge himself or herself:
To take and record depositions of parties,
To take an oath of witness,
To take and record depositions of witnesses,
To make interim or interlocutory orders,
To execute order sheets on matters to be decided in the
case,
To issue order for the examination of evidence,
Preliminary hearing and pre-hearing discussions of cases,
To make hearings,
To effect compromise,
To pass judgments or issue any kind of final order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
judge may take assistance of an employee in the court whose rank is
at least non-gazette first class, as far as available in the court, for the
purposes of taking or record statements or depositions.
289. Translation of document: (1) If any document written in any
language other than the Nepali language is submitted to the court in
the form of evidence, and it appears necessary to translate such a
document in the Nepali language, the court may order the party who
has submitted such a document to submit a translation of the
document in the Nepali language.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned party shall get the document translated in the Nepali
language and submit a certified copy thereof to the court.
290. Assistance of translator: (1) If it is required to take a statement or
deposition of any party or witness who is unable to understand the
Nepali language, or for any other purpose, the court may appoint take
assistance of a translator of the concerned language.
The concerned party shall bear the expenses incurred in
taking assistance of the translator for statement or deposition pursuant
to sub-section (1).
291. Power to ask parties of case at any time: (1) The judge may, prior
to passing a judgment on a case, order and ask any matter to the
parties of the case at any time.
The responses given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
recorded in the case-file.
292. Identity of party or witness may be kept secret: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if it
appears that the disclosure of the identity of any party or witness may
be prejudicial to the social prestige or honor of such a party or witness
or may result in undue fear, terror or fright by any party or be
prejudicial to the security of his/her body or life, the concerned party
may request the court that the name, surname, address of such a party
or witness or the name of his/her father or any other description which
may disclose his/her identity be kept secret.
If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may issue an order that the name, surname and address of such a party
or witness and his/her father's name or his/her identity be kept secret.
In disclosing the name, surname, address of the person
or his/her father's name having been kept secret pursuant to subsection (1) at the time of hearing of the concerned case or publishing
details pertaining thereto, such disclosure shall be made under nick
name, surname, address or father's name, as per the order of the court.
293. Duty to assist in witnessing or signing: (1) Any person required to
witness an action or sign a document prepared by the court in the
course of any proceeding pursuant to this Code shall assist the court
by so witnessing the action or signing the document.
If any person refuses to witness a action or sign a
document as referred to in sub-section (1), the employee executing
that action or document shall execute such document which shall be
signed by any other two persons present and by himself or herself,
setting out that matter and remarks, along with the reason for the
failure of such a person to witness or sign the concerned document.
Any document executed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
be deemed to have been executed in fulfillment of the requirements
specified by law.
If any person required to sign any document executed
before the court refuses to sign it, the judge shall set out the matter,
mention remarks in the concerned document and sign it.
The concerned court may fine a person who causes
obstruction to or does not cooperate in the action of the court pursuant
to this Section with a maximum of five thousand rupees.
294. Saving of act done in good faith: No judge or other employee shall
be subject to any action in relation to any act or action done or taken
in good faith in accordance with this Code or the rules framed under
this Code.
295. Not to be invalid by reason of printing or mathematical error: (1)
Where there is any minor error or omission in respect of the
procedures referred to in this Code while trying, hearing and settling a
case, or mathematical or any other minor error or omission in writing
or printing while preparing any document, all acts and proceedings
relating thereto shall not be deemed invalid merely by that reason.
Where there is any mathematical or any other minor error
or omission in writing or printing while trying, hearing and settling a
case or while preparing any document pursuant to sub-section (1), the
judgment may, by executing a separate memorandum, so correct such
an error or omission that such correction does not affect the verdict.
296. Receipt to be taken or given: (1) While returning any original
document registered in the court to any person or handing over any
original document by the court to any person, a receipt or proof to the
effect the such document has been so returned or handed over shall be
executed or taken and enclosed in the case file.
While receiving any document submitted by any person
to the court, it shall give a receipt of the same to that person.
297. Petition fee: Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, there
shall be charged a fee of ten rupees while making any petition to the
court.
298. Index of documents: There shall be maintained an index of
documents in each case in the format specified in Schedule-30, and
such index shall record the serial number and details of the documents,
according to the order of the date of registration.
299. Disposal of documents: (1) After the completion of five years of the
final decision on a case, the court shall dispose the documents, except
the following documents enclosed in the case file of the said case:
Plaint,
Affidavit,
Statement of defense or counter claim,
Summons issued in the name of party,
Map or design related with the case,
Originals of documentary evidence,
Deed of compromise,
Memorandum of appeal,
Petition made for revision or review of verdict,
Judgment, decision, final decision made by the court,
Any such other documents as considered necessary to be
preserved in accordance with law.
The employee responsible for documents (Shrestedar)
shall, prior to the disposal of documents pursuant to sub-section (1)
prepare an inventory of the documents to be disposed and sign the
inventory.
300. Power to make alteration in Schedules: The Government of Nepal
may, by publishing a notification in the Nepal Gazette, make
necessary alteration in, or addition to, or deletion from, the Schedules.
301. Power to frame rules: The Supreme Court may frame necessary
rules on matters of court proceedings, for the accomplishment of the
objectives of this Code.
302. Power to remove difficulty: If there arises any difficulty in relation
to court proceedings in implementing this Code, the full court of the
Supreme Court may make necessary provision in order to remove
such a difficulty.
303. Power to frame guidelines: The Supreme Court may, subject to this
Code and the rules framed under this Code, frame necessary
guidelines for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Code.
Schedule-1
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 95)
Format of Plaint
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Plaint
lodged in………..Court/Office
Civil diary number of the year……………
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
case of each Plaintiff)
Versus
………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
case of each Defendant)
Case:
I/we Plaintiff make plaint as mentioned in the following paragraphs:
This case is within the jurisdiction of this Court/Office pursuant to
Section… of ……….
In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Evidence:
I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
in this matter:
Witness:
…….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Pliant lodged by:
………………
Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..
Schedule-2
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98)
Format of Diary Book
…………..Court/Office
Civil Diary Book from the month of Shrwan of the year…..to the last day of
the month of Ashad of the year…….
Case number
Date of registration
Plaintiff's signature
Plaintiff's name, surname and
address
Defendant's
name,
surname
address
Name and signature of section chief
Figure of amount in question
Date on which statement of defense
submitted or time limit has expired
Date of judgment and name of judge
passing judgment
Type of judgment
Signature of employee receiving record
case file
Remarks
Schedule-3
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98, sub-section (1) of Section 122,
and sub-section (2) of Section 124)
Receipt
…………..Court/Office
Whereas,
plaint/
statement
defense/
memorandum
appeal
lodged/submitted by…………….., has been received by this Court/Office
and registered in the Diary Book of this Court/Office, with registration
number….on ………(date);
Now, therefore, this receipt is hereby given.
Employee registering plaint/statement of defense/memorandum of appeal:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Seal of Court/Office
Schedule-4
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 99)
Receipt of Acknowledgement of Plaint along with the summons
Whereas, …………………. has lodged the Plaint in …………Court/Office
on……….(date), and has been tendered by him/her to me for the purpose of
submitting a statement of defense;
Now, therefore, I have acknowledged the receipt of the copies of the Plaint
and evidence, along with the summons.
Person acknowledging receipt of Plaint along with the summons:
Signature:
Name:
Date:
Time:
Schedule-5
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 104 and Section 114)
Summons Issued by …….Office/Office
in the Name of Defendant
Whereas, Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/ daughter/ husband/
wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, has lodged a Plaint of
………..case against you Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown,
Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, in this Office/Court on …..date;
Now, therefore, a copy of the Plaint is also hereby herewith forwarded. You
are hereby informed to appear in person or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, accompanied by a Statement of Defense
and your documentary evidence in accordance with law within twenty one
days excluding the time limit required for journey after the date of receipt of
this summons by you or the date of affixation of this summons at your house
according to law.
If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner,
accompanied by the Statement of Defense within the time-limit, the case
shall be adjudicated according to law, and any of your complaints on this
matte shall not be entertained in the future.
Summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Time:
Date of service:
In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
receive:
I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
family of the person required to receive:
As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
required to receive:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a
copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has
delivered
Office
…….VDC/Municipality.
In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
required to receive it is not found:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….
Witnesses
We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
In presence:
Mr./Mrs.
…………….,
member/secretary………..
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District
In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
found
Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board
Office
………….VDC/Municipality:
(Employee or office-bearer)
Process server:
Process server's name, surname:
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-6
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 104)
Summons Issued by …….Office/Office
in the Name of Person Except Defendant
Whereas, it is necessary to inquire you, Mr./Ms………….., age of …….
years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, into
some matters in connection with the case of ………, between the
plaintiff……… and the defendant………..;
Now, therefore, you are hereby informed to appear in person in this
Office/Court or send an attorney or law practitioner appointed in accordance
with law within seven days excluding the time limit required for journey
after the date of receipt of this summons by you or the date of affixation of
this summons at your house according to law.
If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner
within the time-limit, the case shall be adjudicated according to law, and any
of your complaints on this matter shall not be entertained in the future.
Summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Time:
Date of service:
In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
receive:
I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
family of the person required to receive:
As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
required to receive:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a
copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has
delivered
Office
…….VDC/Municipality.
In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
required to receive it is not found:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….
Witnesses
We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
In presence:
Mr./Mrs.
…………….,
member/secretary………..
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District
In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
found
Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board
Office
………….VDC/Municipality:
(Employee or office-bearer)
Process server:
Process server's name, surname:
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-7
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 113)
Receipt Given by Attorney or Law Practitioner upon Receiving Plaint
Accompanied by the Summons/Summons
I have received the Plaint accompanied by the summons and a copy of
evidence/summons tendered by Mr./Ms………………, who has lodged the
Plaint in this Office/Court on……..(date), for the purpose of submitting a
State of Defense.
Attorney
practitioner
receiving
plaint
accompanied by the summons/summons:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Address:
Date:
Time:
Certificate number of attorney/law practitioner:
Schedule-8
(Relating to Section 120)
Format of Statement of Defense
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Statement of Defense Submitted to
………..Court/Office
Civil diary number of the year……………
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
case of each Defendant)
Versus
………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
case of each Plaintiff)
Case:
Whereas, in the above-mentioned case, the summons accompanied by the
Plaint has been served on…….. (date);
I/we have appeared along with the Statement of Defense within the timelimit, in relation to the matters claimed by the Pliant in various paragraphs of
his/her Plaint.
I/we have set out the following paragraphs my/our true statements in
relation to the matters claimed by the Plaintiff:
I/we admit the claims of Plaint fully or partly/do not admit the same at
Mention counter claims if any:
In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Evidence:
I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
in this matter:
Witness:
…….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)
For such and such reasons, this matter is or is not liable to preliminary
hearing pursuant to Section 131 of the Civil Procedure Code, 2067
(2011).
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Statement of Defense submitted by:
………………
Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..
Schedule-9
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)
Format of Book of Due Date
Book of Due Date maintained in………Court/Office
Year:………………..
Month,
appellant/
plaintiff/petitioner
respondent/
plaintiff
Purpose of
appointment
of due date
Remarks
Signature:
Schedule-9
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)
Format of Memorandum of Due Date
Memorandum of due date issued by...............in the name of................
…………………Versus.....................
Whereas, the date of ........, has been appointed as the due date for presence
for the purpose of ................, in the case of……………, civil diary number
………….. of the year…….;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to make presence at........o'clock on
the said day.
Signature of employee appointing due date:
Date:
Schedule-11
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 138)
Format of Receipt of Due Date
Receipt of Due Date Maintained in……..Office/Court
Plaintiff
Defendant
Case:
On……….(date)
Whereas, the case is scheduled to be heard finally for judgment or
…………..business is to be conducted on………..(date);
Now, therefore, I hereby sign covenanting that I shall make presence
at........o'clock on the said day.
Plaintiff:
Defendant:
Schedule-12
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 151)
Format of Power of Attorney
have,
power
attorney,
appointed
authorized
Mr./Ms.......................,
……years,
holding
citizenship
number…..( year and district of issue of citizenship certificate), a resident of
……………., as my attorney to carry out the act of..................... (set out the
purpose) on my behalf, in the case of.......... with................ He/she does not
suffer any disqualification for being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government amount in question or other
fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to law is not due and payable
by me. The contents mentioned above are true and correct. I consent that this
power of attorney may be annulled pursuant to law if the contents mentioned
above are proved to be false.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
I hereby consent to act as an attorney of Mr./Ms..............., age of …… years,
holding citizenship number….. (year and district of issue of citizenship
certificate), a resident of..............., as mentioned above. I shall perform the
said act with honesty. Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government
amount in question or other fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to
law is not due and payable by me. I do not suffer any disqualification for
being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
Witnesses:
It is true and correct that this power of attorney has been drawn up and
signed in our presence.
………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................
………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................
Writer:…………
This Power of Attorney has been drawn up at………….
Date:
Schedule-13
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 185)
Format of Summons Issued in the Name of Witness
Summons issued by............ Office/Court in the name of................a resident
of............
Whereas, you have been mentioned as a witness by …………….. in the case
of..........., in which..................is plaintiff and ..............is defendant, and it is
required to inquire you into some matters and take your deposition;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this Office/Court
at.......o'clock in the morning on the------day of the month of..........the
year........ If you fail to appear, it shall be in accordance with the laws.
Signature of summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
(Seal of the Office/Court)
Schedule-14
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 186)
Format of Deed of Records of Examination of Witness through Video
Conferencing
It is true and correct that since Mr./Ms.…………., a resident of………, who
is a witness of the plaintiff/defendant, in the case…………….., in which
……..is plaintiff and ………….defendant , could not appear in the court,
that witness has been examined through video conferencing by an order
dated……….. The witness was examined in presence of us, the following
persons.
Name, surname of the witness:
Signature of employee deputed by the court:
Name, surname and post of employee deputed by the court:
Signature of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law practitioner:
Name and surname of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law
practitioner:
Signature of member or representative of local body:
Name, surname and post of member or representative of local body:
Schedule-15
(Relating to Section 189)
Form of Oath To be Taken by Witness
I............hereby take an oath in the name of the God/ swear with truth and
honesty that in the case of...............versus............, I shall give true statement
of whatever I have seen, known and heard; that I shall not conceal or lie any
matter; and that I shall give true answers to all questions asked by the
Office/Court and by or on behalf of the parties to the case, to the extent of
whatever I have seen, known and heard. If the matters are proved false, I
shall be liable to the consequences as per law.
Signature of oath taking person:
Date:
It is true and correct that the witness has taken oath in my presence.
(Signature of the judge)
Date:
Schedule-16
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 192)
Format of Taking Deposition of Witness
Case................
Civil Diary Number............of the year.........
………………………..Versus.....................
Deposition of witness...................
Questions and answers of the questions
Question (to be asked by the court): What is your and your father's,
mother's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Question (to be asked by the concerned party/his/her law practitioner):
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
(Note: If the concerned party or law practitioner does not ask any
question, the court shall ask necessary questions)
If the opposite party/law practitioner has made crossexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
If the concerned party party/law practitioner desires to make reexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
If the court desires to ask any question, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
It is true and correct that this deposition records what I have
stated.
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:
Date:
Schedule-17
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 194)
Form of Commission/Letter of Rogetory
A commission/letter rogetory sent by...............
Case number .............
Of the year.....
……………………………………..Plaintiff
Versus
……………………………………..Defendant
Deposition of witness...............
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Questions asked and sent by the court:
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……..
If the opposite party/law practitioner has appeared and made crossexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
It is true and correct that this deposition by commission records what I
have stated.
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition by commission:
Signature of the person or judge taking deposition by commission:
Date:
Schedule-18
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 203)
...........Court
Form of Judgment
…….District Court/Office
Bench
Judgment passed by…….
Civil Diary Number...............of the year....................
Case:
Name, surname and address of the
Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs,
mention the same details in the case
of each Plaintiff)
Name, surname and address of the
Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants,
mention the same details in the case
of each Defendant)
Plaintiff's witness……..
Defendant's witness……..
Evidence:
Evidence:
Examined by the court:
Witness:…………..
Evidence:…………
………….
Brief facts of the case:
Matters to be decided by the court:
Verdict of the court, accompanied by the reasons:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: On the basis of the plaint lodged, statement of defense submitted in
rebuttal of the plaint, counterclaims, evidences furnished by the plaintiff or
the defendant in the concerned case, and the relevant laws, the judge shall
have to set down his/her verdict specifying the reasons why the claims of the
plaint or counterclaims sustain or not.)
Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
Matter relating to court fees:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
along with the date
Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..
Schedule-19
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 205)
Format of Notice of Appeal Time Limit along with Judgment/ Notice of
Judgment
The notice of appeal time limit along with judgment/notice of judgment
issued by ……………Court/Office in the name of ………………, a resident
of……………………………….
Whereas, in the case of…………, in which …………..is plaintiff and
…………….is defendant, judgment has been passed by this Court/Office
on……………., sustaining the plaintiff claim/dismissing the plaintiff
claim/withholding the plaintiff claim;
Now, therefore, if you are not satisfied with the judgment, you are hereby
informed to make an appeal in the Appellate Court within…..days from the
date of receipt of this time-limit or of the affixation of the notice of timelimit at your house. If you fail to make an appeal within the time limit and
expire the time limit, the case shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
Any of your subsequent claims shall not be entertained. This notice is hereby
sent for your information.
Signature of authority issuing the notice of appeal time limit/judgment:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Schedule-20
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 213)
Format of Memorandum of Appeal
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Memorandum of Appeal
filed in………..Court/Office
………………, a resident of……… Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the
case of each Appellant)
Versus
………………, a resident of……… Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the
case of each Respondent)
Case:
The judge and Court/Office passing judgment:
Date of judgment:
Case file number of judgment:
Whereas, I/ we am/are not satisfied with the judgment passed by the said
judge and the court/office in the above-mentioned case in which I/ we
am/are party, thereby holding the following matters in relation to the
following matters, and I/ we have got the notice of the judgment
on….(mention the date);
Now, therefore, I/ we hereby make the following appeal, pursuant to
Section…..of the Civil Code, 2067 (2010).
Short description of the case:
Grounds on which the judgment is based:
Reasons for making appeal and matters of rebuttal of the grounds on
which the judgment is based:
Appeal pleas:
Court fees and other fees chargeable in making appeal:
Other necessary matters, if any:
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Appellant's signature:
Date:
Schedule-21
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 219)
Format of Notice Issued to Summon the Presence of Respondent
…….Office/Office
……………………………………
Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
Versus
…………………………..………
Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
Notice issued in the name of Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, an order (mention the short description of the order) was issued by
this Court on……….(date);
Now, therefore, this notice, accompanied by a copy of the order, is hereby
sent to you for your information. You are hereby informed to appear in
person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with law,
accompanied by your documentary evidence in that case. Otherwise, the
matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law. The case may be
matured for decision after fifteen days of the service of this notice.
On this…………..day, ….of the month of ………of the year………, this
notice is issued under the seal of the court and with my signature.
(Seal of court)
As ordered,
Signature
Schedule-22
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 220)
Form of Appellate Judgment
...........Court
(Single/Division Bench)
Judgment passed by Honorable Judge…….
Civil Appeal Number...............of the year....................
Case:……..
Full name, surname and address of the Appellant
Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the case of
each Appellant)
Full name, surname and address of the Respondent
Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the case
of each Respondent)
Brief facts of the case:
(Mention brief facts of the case and matters in which appeal has been
made)
Mention short description of the order made by the Appellate Court to
summon the presence of the Respondent:
Mention short description of the evidence, if any, examined:
Appeal claims and matters to be decided by the Appellate Court
(mention in points)
Decision and verdict of the Court, accompanied by the reasons and
grounds:
Subsequent section:
Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
Matter relating to court fees:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
along with the date
Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..
Schedule-23
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 228)
Format of Request for the Service of Judicial Document
Name and address of the foreign court making order to serve the
judicial document in Nepal:
Description of the case:
Description of the judicial document to be served:
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
the person on whom the judicial has to be served:
Description of which procedure or mode has to be adopted for the
service of the judicial document:
Description of the body making request for the service of the judicial
document:
Concerned authority:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Office:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-24
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 229)
Format of Description of the Service of Judicial Document
The undersigned has certified that the following judicial document has been
served as follows or that it has not been served:
Country making request for the service of the judicial document and
authority of such a country:
Description of the judicial document served:
Date of receipt of the judicial document to be served:
Case:
The name, surname and address of the person on whom the judicial to
be served or has been served:
Description of whom the judicial document has been delivered to and
served:
Full name:
Address:
His/her relation with the person whom the judicial document to
be served or has been served:
Where the service has been executed in any manner other than that set
forth in paragraph 6, description thereof:
Whether service has been executed in accordance with the laws of
Nepal or in accordance with separate mode pursuant to the request of
the concerned country:
In the event of failure to execute the service, description thereof:
In the event of failure to execute the service, description of the return
of the judicial document:
Certifying authority:
Name, surname:
Office:
Signature:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-25
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 230)
Format of Details of Evidence To Be Examined Abroad
Name and address of the court/office making order to examine the
evidence abroad:
Description of the case:
Date of filing of case:
Plaintiff……………
Defendant…………
Description of the evidence to be taken:
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
the person from whom evidence has to be taken:
Procedures and manner of examination of the evidence:
Description of the body making request for the taking of evidence:
Concerned authority:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Office:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-26
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 249)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Presence of Party For the
Purpose of Execution of Judgment
Twenty-one Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name
of Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a
resident of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.
Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been
adjudicated) was passed by the………… Court on……….(date), in the case
of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is defendant;
Now, therefore, this summons has been issued to summon your presence for
the purpose of execution of the judgment. You are hereby informed to
appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with
law, within twenty one days, excluding the time limit required for journey,
after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of affixation of the
summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. The matter shall be
proceeded with in accordance with law if you do not make presence within
the time limit.
(Signature)
(Full name, surname)
Bailiff
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-27
(Relating to sub-section (9) of Section 252)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Person to Open the Lock of
House/Shop to be Foreclosed
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident
of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.
Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been adjudicated)
was passed by the………… Court on……….(date) to make foreclosure, in
the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is
defendant, and whereas, a mission was sent by his Court to make foreclosure,
by the mission found that the house/shop, built in plot number….., situated
at Ward No….., ………..VDC/Municipality,…………District, was locked
up and you, who are the owner of that house/shop did not appear to open
that lock;
Now, therefore, this fifteen-day summons has been affixed at the house/shop
to be foreclosed, hereby requiring you to open the lock of that house/shop.
You are hereby required to open the lock of that house/shop within fifteen
days after the affixation of this summons. If you do not open the lock within
that time limit, the mission sent by the court shall effect the foreclosure of
the house or shop by breaking the lock. Any complaint by you in this regard
shall not be entertained in the future.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-28
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 255)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Does not
Appear For Setting Aside Partition Share
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, the other coparceners appeared in
the Court for the setting aside of partition shares in accordance with law in
pursuance of the judgment but you were absent;
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby issued requiring you to make
presence to receive your share in partition in accordance with law. You are
hereby required to appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in
accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time limit required
for journey, after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of
affixation of the summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. If you
make presence, the partition shall be effected by setting aside the partition
shares of all coparceners including you at the same time. But if you fail to
make presence, you shall not be entitled to make a complaint in the future
that the partition was executed in your absence and executed partition was
not proportionate or was unjust. The matter shall be proceeded with in
accordance with law if you do not make presence in the court within the
time limit.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-29
(Relating to sub-section (8) of Section 255)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Is To Give
Partition Share or Who Takes Custody of Property To Be Partitioned
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, a commission was sent by the
court to execute partition in pursuance of the judgment but you were not
found and any major person in your undivided family did not produce all
properties as set forth in the inventory of property;
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby affixed at your house. You are
hereby required to appear in person in the court or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time
limit required for journey, after the date of affixation of the summons, in
order to show and set aside all properties that are to be partitioned and in
your custody, as set forth in the inventory of properties, and effect partition
accordingly. If you fail to make presence in person or send your attorney or
law practitioner, the matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-30
(Relating to Section 268)
Civil cases in which Government is plaintiff
Case involving the right, interest or concern of the Government of
Nepal or any office thereof, court, constitutional body
Case relating to concealment of governmental land
Case relating to concealment of land tax or tariff
Case under Sections 460 and 461 of Chapter-11 of this Code
Case involving the issue of concealment of governmental money or
asset or case involving the matter of determination of governmental
locus standi
Such other civil case as may be specified to be one in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff, pursuant to this Code, by the
Government of Nepal from time to time by publishing a notice in the
Nepal Gazette.
Schedule-31
(Relating to Section 285)
Format of Index of Documents
.............................................versus.......................................
Case:
Case file number.........of year........
Serial
number of
documents
Short description of
documents
Name of
parties
submitting
documents
Date of
submission
documents
Signature
employee
Never to
disposed
To be
disposed
after five
years
Signature of preparer:
Signature of certifying officer:

===== SOURCE: National-Criminal-Procedure-Code(2074).pdf =====

(Revised)
The National Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017
Date of Authentication:
16 October 2017
Act Number 37 of the year 2017
An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Laws Relating to
Procedures of Criminal Cases
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make the procedural law simplified and
timely, by amending and consolidating the laws in force relating to
procedures on investigation, prosecution, filing, proceeding, hearing and
adjudication of criminal cases and other procedures related thereto, and
execution of judgments on such cases;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1)
of Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"National Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017".

Section 192 of this Act shall commence on such date as
appointed by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, and the other Sections, on 17 August 2018.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Code,-
"court" means the Supreme Court, High Court or District
Court, and this term also includes any other court, judicial
body or authority empowered by law to proceed, hear and
adjudicate any specific type of criminal cases;
"investigating authority" means an authority designated under
this Act or competent authority under law to make
investigation into any offence, and this term also includes an
investigation team formed to investigate into any specific
offence;
"Penal Code" means the National Penal (Code) Act, 2017;
"complaint" means a plaint to be filed in a court, and this term
also includes a charge-sheet in relation to any offence under
Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, and a report thereon in relation to
any other case;
"offence" means an act punishable by the Penal Code or other
"law" means a law for the time being in force;
"grave offence" means any offence punishable by a sentence
of imprisonment for a term of more than three and less than
ten years;
"heinous offence" means any offence punishable by a sentence
of imprisonment for life or for a term of more than ten years,
"place" means a house, shed, cow shed, elephant shed or tent,
and this term also includes a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft,
and other place or means of similar nature;
"judge" means the authority of a court to proceed, hear and
adjudicate a case, and this term also includes an authority
competent to proceed, hear and adjudicate a criminal case;
"police office" means a police office authorized to investigate
into any offence set forth in Schedule-1;
"criminal case" means a case related to an offence under
Schedule-1, Schedule-2, Schedule-3 or Schedule-4, and this
term also includes any other case, except a case on any of the
following matters:
A case related to a legal right, status, post, family
relationship or property,
Establishment of relationship, or divorce,
Fee, remuneration, salary, allowance or wage,
Partition,
succession,
donation,
gift,
will,
guardianship, curatorship, parental authority,
adoption,
Any right or claim under any contract, quasicontract or unlawful enrichment,
Any right or claim relating to tort, quasi-tort or
defective product,
Servitude,
Compensation, or
Any other right or liability of civil nature.
"case" means a criminal case;
"adjudicating authority" means an authority empowered by
law to proceed, hear and adjudicate a case, and this term also
includes, in the case of a person taken in custody, a court
nearby the place where the person is taken in custody;
"Local Level" means a Village Body (Gownpalika) or
Municipality;
(p) "government attorney" means the Attorney General, Deputy
Attorney General, Joint Attorney, Deputy Attorney, District
Attorney or Assistant District Attorney, and this term also
includes an officer designated by the Attorney General to act
in the capacity of government attorney.
Special legal provisions, if any, made not to be affected: (1) If a
separate Act provides for special provisions on the prosecution,
investigation, trial, hearing, execution of judgments or any other
proceeding of, or jurisdiction to try cases on, any specific offence,
such matters shall be governed by such Act and shall not be affected
by any provision contained in this Act.
This Act shall govern the matters of procedures on
which special legal provisions have not been made pursuant to subsection (1).

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Information on Commission of, and
Investigation into, Offences
First information report or information on commission of
offence to be given: (1) A person who knows that any offence set
forth in Schedule-1 has been committed or is being committed or is
likely to be committed shall, as soon as possible, make a first
information report in writing or give information on such offence,
verbally or through electronic means, along with whatever proof or
evidence which is in his or her possession or which he or she has
seen or known, to the nearby police office in the form referred to in
Schedule-5.
If a person making a first information report or giving
information referred to in sub-section (1) does not give such
information in writing, the concerned police employee shall set down
all matters of information given by the person in the form referred to
in Schedule-5, read out the same to, and cause it to be signed by, that
person.
If a person makes in person a first information report or
gives information referred to in sub-section (1) to the concerned
police office, or sends such information through any person or
electronic means, such police office shall register such report or
information and give that person a receipt thereof, in the form
referred to in Schedule-6. If any person gives information through
electronic means, acknowledgement of receipt of such information
shall be given through the same means.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
(2) or (3), if the police receives any report or information about the
commission of any offence set forth in Schedule-1 from any other
source or on his or her own, the police shall prepare a report along
with the details set forth in Schedule-5.
The police office shall enter the first information report,
information referred to in this Section or the report referred to in subsection (4) in a register in the form referred to in Schedule-7.
Any first information report or information received
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be forwarded to the separate
investigating authority, if any, specified by law in relation to such
report or information, and, failing the specification of such separate
investigating authority, to the concerned district police office.
A person wishing to give information about any offence
set forth in Schedule-2 shall give such information, in the form
referred to in Schedule-5, to the office or authority empowered to
investigate into that offence.
The concerned office or authority shall register the
information received pursuant to sub-section (7) and give a receipt
thereof, in the form referred to in Schedule-6, to the person who
gives such information.
If it is not possible to immediately register the
information referred to in sub-section (7) in the concerned office or
authority, such information may also be given to the nearby police
office.
(10) The concerned police office shall, if it receives any
information pursuant to sub-section (9), register such information
pursuant to sub-section (5) and forward it to the concerned office or
authority not later than three days for action.
Complaint against refusal to register first information report or
information: (1) If the concerned police office refuses to register a
first information report made or information given pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 4, the person making or giving such first
information report or information may make a complaint setting out
such matter, accompanied by the first information report or
information, to the concerned district government attorney office or
the police office higher in level than the police office required to
register such first information report or information.
If a complaint referred to in sub-section (1) is received,
the concerned district government attorney office or police office
shall maintain records thereof and forward such first information
report or information to the concerned police office for necessary
action.
The concerned police office shall, in accordance with
sub-section (3) of Section 4, register and take action on the first
information report or information received pursuant to sub-section
If the office or authority referred to in sub-section (7) of

Section 4 refuses to register any information referred to in that subsection, the person giving such information may make a complaint
setting out the matter, accompanied by the information of offence, to
the Chief District Officer of the concerned district.
Provided that where the Chief District Officer himself or
herself is designated as the investigating authority and refuses to
register such information, such complaint may be made to the
Ministry of Home Affairs.
Upon receipt of any complaint referred to in sub-section
(4), the concerned Chief District Officer or the Ministry of Home
Affairs shall decide, within three days, as to whether or not to
register such information, and give direction to the concerned office
to take, or cause to be taken, action accordingly.
Upon receipt of any direction referred to in sub-section
(5), the concerned office or authority shall take action in pursuance
of the direction.
Arrangements to be made to prevent evidence from being
concealed or destructed and prevent offender from escaping: (1)
If any police office or police employee gets information that any
offence set forth in Schedule-1 has been committed or is being
committed or is likely to be committed, such office or employee
shall, as promptly as possible, make necessary and effective
arrangements in order to prevent the offender from committing the
offence or prevent any evidence related to the offence from being
disappeared or destructed and prevent the offender from going away
or escaping.
If there is a likelihood of the concealment or destruction
of any evidence related to the offence or the escaping or going away
of the offender where immediate action is not taken pursuant to subsection (1), such police office or employee may take necessary action
in that behalf, even by entering the area of another police office, as
per necessity.
In the event of a need for taking any action by entering
the area of another police office pursuant to sub-section (2), such
police office or employee shall give information thereof to the
concerned police office or body and the higher police office.
If the concerned authority comes to know, on his or her
own initiative or on information made by any one, that any offence
set forth in Schedule-2 has been committed or is being committed or
is likely to be committed, such authority shall take action referred to
in sub-section (1) or (2).
Provided that if any police employee receives information
about such offence and the concerned investigating authority is not
available for the time being, such police employee shall take action
referred to in sub-section (1) and send the statements of such action,
together with the person, if any arrested, to the investigating
authority.
Any police employee or investigating authority may ask
any body, authority or person to render assistance in preventing the
disappearance or destruction of any evidence related to the offence
or in arresting the offender; and it shall be the duty of such body,
authority or person to render necessary assistance wherever such
assistance is so asked for.
If a police employee sees a person committing an
offence in his or her presence or at a time when the police employee
is there in search of clues upon receipt of a notice, information or
clue that such offence has been committed or is being committed or
is likely to be committed, the police employee shall immediately
arrest the person committing such offence.
The police employee shall take possession of exhibits
and other proofs, evidence or things related to the offence, if any,
found on the spot and execute a deed thereon, as required, in the
presence of the eye witnesses, if any, present on the spot.
Such thing, place or spot shall be protected as it is until
the completion of the execution of such deed pursuant to sub-section
Where it is not possible to immediately seize or take
possession of the exhibits and other evidence or things related to the
offence obtained pursuant to sub-section (7), the concerned police
employee may make a request to the Local Level or any other office
to safely retain such exhibits or things, and the concerned Level or
office shall, when so requested, take custody of such exhibits or
evidence and give a receipt thereof.
Provided that the goods not related to the offence shall be
immediately returned to the concerned person.
Information to be given to concerned police office: (1) If the any
police office knows, from the contents of information received by it
in relation to any offence set forth in Schedule-1or on its own
initiative, that such offence has been committed or is being
committed or is likely to be committed in the area of another police
office, such police office shall, as soon as possible, send such
information to the concerned police office, and inform the informant
to appear in the concerned police office, as required.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if there is a possibility that the offender may escape and any exhibits
or evidence related to the offence may disappear due to the nonavailability of the investigating authority for the time being because
of geographical remoteness or any other cause, the competent
investigating officer of the concerned police office receiving such
information shall make preliminary investigation into the offence
committed in such area and send details of such investigation to the
concerned police office.
Such authority shall, prior to making preliminary
investigation pursuant to sub-section (2), give information to the
concerned police office and the one level higher police office.
Collection of proof and evidence upon making investigation: (1)
Upon receipt of any information that an offence set forth in
Schedule-1 has been committed or is being committed or is likely to
be committed, the concerned police office shall, as soon as possible,
designate a police employee whose rank is at least assistant subinspector as the investigating authority and give information thereof
to the concerned government attorney office and the higher police
office; and the investigating authority so designated shall conduct
investigation into such offence.
Provided that a police employee whose rank is at least police
inspector shall be designated to investigate into any of the following
offences:
Offences set forth in Chapter-1, Chapter-12, Chapter17, Section 219 of Chapter-18, Sections 230, 231, 232,
sub-section (4) of Section 233, Section 235, sub-section
(4) of Section 238 of Chapter-19, Section 244 of

Chapter-20, Sections 256, 257 and 258 of Chapter 22,
of Part-2 of the Penal Code,
Offences related to narcotic drugs, human trafficking
and transportation and foreign exchange,
Any other offence so specified by the Government of
Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, taking into
account the gravity of the offence.
The investigating authority shall, in conducting
investigation under this Section, prepare a deed on the scene of crime
containing the following matters, as far as practicable, in such
manner as to demonstrate the actual description of the offence and
the place where the offence was committed:
The date and time when the offence was committed,
The address, description and sketch of the place where
the offence was committed,
The circumstance of such place and its connection with
the offence or offender,
The exhibits or evidence found or seen at or around the
place where the offence was committed, and any other
significant matters related to the offence.
After preparing a deed on the scene of offence pursuant
to sub-section (2), the investigating authority may, as far as
practicable, take a photograph of such place and of any finger print
or foot print, mark or other exhibits seen or found at such place or
any other important matter that may be helpful in establishing the
guilt.
In preparing a deed on the scene of crime pursuant to
sub-section (2), thumb impressions as well as identity disclosing
details of the offender or accused person, if present, shall also be
taken.
The investigating authority shall take possession of the
exhibits, evidence, object or article related to the offence, if any
found.
The authority taking possession of any exhibits,
evidence, object or article pursuant to sub-section (5) shall give a
receipt thereof to the concerned person.
Investigation into any of the offences set forth in
Schedule-2 shall be conducted by the authority, if any, specified by
law to that effect, and, failing the specification of such authority, by
the concerned chief district officer or officer level employee
designated by him or her.
The authority specified pursuant to sub-section (7) shall,
in conducting investigation into such offence, fulfill the procedures
set forth in sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6).
In conducting investigation into any offence committed
on the same occasion pursuant to this Chapter, investigation into all
cases that may be instituted from the acts done on such occasion
shall be conducted at the same time.
Power to arrest person related to offence: (1) The police or
investigating authority may arrest any person related to an offence if
such person is found or caught in the course of committing the
offence.
If, in the course of investigation into any offence, it is
necessary to arrest any person immediately in accordance with this
Chapter, an application, along with the reason for such arrest, and the
details disclosing the identity of the person to be arrested, as far as
practicable, shall be made to the adjudicating authority for
permission to issue a warrant of arrest.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (2) and
the reason for arrest appears to be reasonable, the adjudicating
authority may, on the same application, give permission to issue a
warrant of arrest.
The form of a warrant of arrest shall be as referred to in
Schedule-8.
The order referred to in sub-section (3) shall not be
disclosed until the person to be arrested is arrested.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if a person who is not arrested at once or there is a reasonable ground
to believe that such person may abscond, escape or destroy the
evidence, exhibits or proof, such person shall be arrested
immediately upon issuing an urgent warrant of arrest in the form
referred to in Schedule-9, and the matter shall be submitted to the
adjudicating authority, along with the person so arrested, for
permission.
If any person is arrested upon issuing an urgent warrant
of arrest pursuant to sub-section (6), no other investigation related
proceedings related to such offence may be initiated without
obtaining permission from the adjudicating authority.
If the police is not available for the time being at the
time of commission of any offence, any person who is present at the
time of commission of that offence or who is eye witness thereto
may prevent the person committing such offence from going away or
escaping and hand him or her over to the nearby police office.
If it is necessary to arrest a person pursuant to subsection (1) or (6), such person shall, prior to arresting him or her, be
informed of the cause necessitating his or her arrest and reminded,
persuaded and ordered to surrender himself or herself.
(10) If, in spite of the remainder, persuasion or order under
sub-section (9), any person does not surrender himself or herself but
makes attempt to evade, escape or avoid arrest or confronts or
attempts to confront in any manner, with or without the use of force,
the police employee may use necessary force to arrest him or her.
(11) If a woman is to be arrested pursuant to this Section, the
woman shall be arrested by a female police as far as possible.
Provided that if a female police is not available for the time
being to arrest such woman, nothing shall bar the arresting of such
woman by a male police employee in such manner as to respect her
physical sensitivity and as not to undermine her dignity or prestige.
(12) A person who is arrested pursuant to this Section or his
or her body may be searched.
(13) If there is a reasonable ground to suspect that any
person to be arrested pursuant to this Section is residing in any house
or place, that person may be arrested by making search of such house
or place.
(14) If a person is arrested upon making search pursuant to
sub-section (13), the body of such person may also be searched.
(15) The person who arrests such person or investigating
authority shall take custody of any evidence related document or
exhibits, evidence or any other thing found during the search made
pursuant to sub-section (12) or (13), and give a receipt thereof.
(16) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any person commits any offence under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2 in the presence of any police employee or authority or in
any government office, the concerned police employee, authority or
chief of office may, as required, arrest such person.
Preliminary investigation report to be forwarded: (1) The
investigating authority or police employee designated to investigate
into any of the offences set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 shall
conduct preliminary investigation immediately after a first
information report or information as to the commission of such
offence has been registered pursuant to Section 4.
Such investigating authority or police employee shall,
after the commencement of the preliminary investigation pursuant to
sub-section (1), forward a report thereof to the district government
attorney office within three days.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"preliminary investigation" means the description of the scene of
offence, deed on the scene of crime, search or seizure deed or deed
of examination of corpse in the case of homicide, and, in the case of
other offence, report, deed or other necessary description required to
be prepared depending on the nature of such offence.
The government attorney may, upon receipt of a
preliminary report pursuant to sub-section (1), give necessary
instruction, accompanied by the reasons, to the investigating
authority if the attorney thinks, on studying the report, that it is
expedient to give such instruction to conduct further investigation
into any matter in connection with the offence.
It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating
authority to comply with the instruction given pursuant to subsection (3).
Power to abate deceptive, false or fabricated information: (1) If,
also upon inquiring into the concerned person or informant in
relation to the first information report or report received as to any
offence set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, it appears that it is
unnecessary or meaningless to conduct investigation into such
offence by the reason that such report or information is deceptive,
false or fabricated, the concerned police office shall send a report
setting out that matter to the concerned government attorney office
not later than three days in general cases.
Upon receipt of a report pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned government attorney office may abate the investigation
into such offence for the time being subject to the conducting of
investigation as and when additional evidence is found if there is no
reasonable ground to conduct such investigation immediately or give
direction, accompanied by the reason, to the investigating authority
to conduct further investigation if, upon studying the nature of
commission of offence on that occasion, it thinks appropriate to
conduct investigation immediately.
If the government attorney office gives direction to
conduct investigation pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
investigating authority shall conduct investigation into such offence.
Power to form special team to conduct investigation: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
Inspector General of Police or the pertinent superior authority of the
investigating authority is of the opinion that it is appropriate to form
a separate investigating team to conduct investigation into any
offence set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 of this Act by the
reason that such investigation cannot be conducted by the designated
investigating authority alone in view of the gravity of that offence,
the Inspector General of Police or such superior authority may form
an investigating team consisting of his or her subordinate employees.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if it is required to form an investigating team consisting of other
persons also, in addition to his or her subordinate employees, the
pertinent superior authority of such investigating authority or the
Inspector General of Police may, in consultation with the Attorney
General on that matter, form an investigating team consisting of
experts as well, and cause such investigation to be conducted by that
team.
If an investigating team is formed pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), such team shall conduct investigation, in exercise
of the powers conferred to the investigating authority under this
Chapter.
If an investigating team is formed pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), the concerned investigating authority shall hand
over to such team the details of investigation conducted by him or
The investigating team formed pursuant to sub-section
(1) or (2) shall conduct investigation and submit its report to the
concerned government attorney and give information thereof to the
concerned police office, as well.
If, upon receipt of a report pursuant to sub-section (5),
the government attorney considers it necessary to give necessary
direction to conduct further investigation on any matter related to the
offence, he or she may give necessary direction, accompanied by the
reason therefor, to the investigating team.
It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating team
to comply with the direction given by the government attorney
pursuant to sub-section (6).
To hold in detention: (1) A person who is arrested in accordance
with this Chapter shall be held in detention.
A person shall be detained pursuant to sub-section (1),
only upon serving on such person a warrant for detention in the form
referred to in Schedule-10, setting out the place where such person
was arrested and the reason for holding in detention.
If any person is detained pursuant to sub-section (1),
there shall be prepared his or her records containing, inter alia, his or
her name, surname, age, address including street, father's name,
mother's name, citizenship certificate or other identity card, if any,
disclosing his or her identity, and failing such certificate or card,
driving license, passport, telephone number, if any, and duplicate
copies of similar documents setting out his or her real identity.
For the purposes of sub-section (3), the investigating
authority may, as required, also take his or her photograph and
thumb impressions of both hands, with palms.
After the preparation of the records pursuant to subsection (3), the concerned police office or investigating authority
shall give information, based on such records, about his or her
detention to the person specified by the person held in detention to
receive such information.
If a person arrested pursuant to this Section intends to
consult a law practitioner, the investigating authority shall allow him
or her to consult such law practitioner.
Period during which one may be held in detention for
investigation, and procedures relating thereto: (1) After a person
has been arrested under this Chapter for investigation into any
offence, the person shall be produced before the adjudicating
authority as soon as possible within twenty-four hours.
No person shall be held in detention in contravention of
sub-section (1).
If it is necessary to hold any person in detention for a
period exceeding that set forth in sub-section (1), the investigating
authority shall make an application for remand, accompanied by the
reasons and grounds for such detention, to the adjudicating authority
through the government attorney office.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the period
required for the journey from the place of arrest to the police office
or from the police office to the court for the purpose of producing the
person arrested before the adjudicating authority within twenty-four
hours shall not be counted.
The application made by the investigating authority to
the adjudicating authority pursuant to sub-section (3) shall clearly
state the charge made against the detained person, grounds of such
charge, reason for detaining him or her for investigation and details
according to his or her deposition, if made.
A person who is produced for a remand for detention
pursuant to sub-section (2) may, if he or she so wishes, make an
application to the adjudicating authority for the physical examination
of his or her body.
If the investigating authority requests for a remand for
detention of a person pursuant to sub-section (3), the adjudicating
authority may remand such person in detention for a maximum
period of twenty-five days at one time or several times if, upon
studying the relevant documents and also upon hearing the pleadings
of the legal practitioner concerned, if considered necessary, the
adjudicating authority thinks that it is necessary to keep on detaining
such person for investigation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6),
both the investigating authority and the government attorney may
submit to the adjudicating authority a report, along with the reason,
that investigation into any offence related to assault on the President,
espionage, giving provocation to the desertion of a soldier, waging
war against the State of Nepal, assistance to the army of a state
involved in a war against Nepal, explosives, kidnapping or hostagetaking, out of the offences under Schedule-1, cannot be completed
within the period given under sub-section (6).
If a report referred to in sub-section (7) is submitted, the
adjudicating authority may, having regard to the status of
investigation, remand the accused person in detention for a
maximum of additional fifteen days at one time or several times.
Provided that no person accused of any offence may be held in
detention for a period exceeding the term of imprisonment that is
imposable on him or her if he or she is held guilty thereof.
In issuing a remand order pursuant to sub-section (6) or
(8), the adjudicating authority shall execute a memorandum,
accompanied by the reasons therefor.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the investigating authority, in view of the nature of the
offence, thinks it reasonable to conduct investigation without holding
in detention a woman with pregnancy of more than seven months, a
child, and a person over 75 years of age, such authority may conduct
investigation by remanding such woman, child or person on
recognizance, and executing a memorandum to that effect,
accompanied by the reasons therefor.
Power of investigating authority to release person held in
detention: (1) If it does not appear necessary or appropriate to keep
on detaining a person held in detention in the course of investigation
under this Act, the investigating authority may, with the consent of
the government attorney or by executing a memorandum,
accompanied by the reasons therefor, where it is not possible to
obtain such consent for the time being, remand such person on
bail/bond or guarantee or personal guarantee furnished by any
reliable person or on recognizance to appear on appointed days.
In remanding any person on bail/bond, or on
recognizance to appear on appointed days pursuant to sub-section
(1), a deed shall be caused to be executed by the person so released,
covenanting that he or she shall appear when it becomes necessary to
institute the case against him or her.
A person who furnishes personal guarantee pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall cause the person released on his or her personal
guarantee to appear at such time as appointed by the investigating
authority or government attorney office.
If a person who furnishes personal guarantee fails to
cause such person to appear at the time appointed pursuant to subsection (3), he or she shall be liable to a fine of five thousand rupees.
Where investigation has been conducted by remanding a
person on recognizance to appear on appointed days, the
investigating authority shall give information thereof to the
government attorney and the higher police office.
Deposition and interrogation: (1) The investigating authority may
take deposition from the accused in relation to any offence under
Schedule-1 or Schedule-2 in the presence of the government
attorney.
In taking deposition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
government attorney shall have the right to ask necessary matter as
required to be set out in relation to the offence.
The investigating authority shall interrogate, as
necessary, any person, who is believed, based on a reasonable
ground, to have knowledge of any important matter in connection
with any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.
Provided that if it is required to interrogate any child or any
person who is physically incompetent, such child or person may be
interrogated at his or her abode.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"physically incompetent" means a physically incompetent person
such as one who cannot make movement, who is with visual
impairment or who is of elderly age.
The investigating authority shall, if interrogation is
made pursuant to sub-section (3), record the matters interrogated in
the form referred to in Schedule-11 and attach the same with the
concerned case-file.
If it is necessary to have a document executed by a child
or physically incompetent person pursuant to this Section, it shall be
executed in presence of his or her guardian or other person available.
If any person who is to make deposition or be
interrogated pursuant to this Section is not able to present before the
investigating authority for the reason of physical illness or it is not
appropriate to cause his or her presence before such authority for the
reason of his or her security, the investigating authority may take
statement of or interrogate such person through video conference.
The investigating authority shall, if statement is taken or
interrogation made pursuant to sub-section (6), arrange for
maintaining the records thereof.
To answer question asked: The concerned person shall assist in
investigation by giving answer, to the best of his or her knowledge,
to any question asked by the investigating authority in connection
with any offence being investigated under this Chapter.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to give any answer
which might be of self-incriminatory nature.
Power to make search: (1) If, in conducting investigation into any
offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, the investigating authority
has a reasonable ground to suspect that any document, exhibit,
evidence, accused or other person connected with such offence is in
any place, the authority may search such person or place and seize
such document, exhibit or evidence.
Prior to making a search pursuant to sub-section (1),
there shall be served on the person residing for the time being in the
house to be searched a notice in writing, accompanied by the reason
for making search, in the form referred to in Schedule-12.
In making a search pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall
be made upon executing a deed in the form referred to in Schedule13.
The investigating authority shall get the concerned
house owner or person to search him or her as well, prior to entering
into such place in order to make search pursuant to sub-section (1).
In making a search of a house or room where only
women reside or stay pursuant to sub-section (1), such search shall
be made by entering into such house or room, being accompanied by
another wamen also, as far as possible.
Provided that in searching the body of a woman, such search
shall be caused to be made by a female police or by any other
woman if such police is not available for the time being.
The employee making search shall prepare a deed in
duplicate containing the description of the objects connected with the
offence found during search, the scene and circumstance thereof,
give one copy of the deed to the concerned person and retain the
other copy in the case-file.
If a person or place to be searched is located in the area
under jurisdiction of another police office, the investigating authority
may make a request in writing to such police office to make search
of such person or place.
If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (7), a police
employee of that police office whose rank is at least assistant subinspector of police shall search such person or place, prepare a deed
referred to in sub-section (1) and send it to the authority making such
request.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7),
if the investigating authority thinks that any evidence could be
concealed or destroyed in the event of making a request in writing to
such police office, the investigating authority himself or herself may
go to the place or site where the person to be searched is staying and
search such person or place pursuant to this Section and shall give
information thereof to the concerned office or police office.
(10) If the authority making search pursuant to this Section
wishes to take with him or her any object connected with the offence
and found in the course of making search, he or she may do so only
after giving a receipt thereof to the concerned person.
(11) Except where there is a reasonable ground to believe
that any exhibit or evidence may be concealed or destroyed or the
suspected person may flee or escape if search of any place is not
made immediately, the search of a house owned by any person shall
be made any time from the sunrise to the sunset.
(12) Where the authority making search seeks an entry into
any house or place in the course of making a search pursuant to this
Section, the owner of the house or place or the person who has taken
charge of such house or place or any other person residing there for
the time being shall allow such authority to enter into such house or
place, by opening its gate or door or in any other manner, and if such
entry is denied, the authority making search may enter into the house
or place by breaking the key, if any, or breaking or demolishing only
such parts of the windows, doors, roofs, walls etc. of such house or
place as may be necessary to enter into such house or place and in
such manner as to cause minimal loss or damage as far as possible.
(13) If, for any reason, it is not possible for a person who has
entered into any house or place to exit from it in a normal way after
making search pursuant to this Section, the person may exit from it
by breaking or demolishing any such part of its windows, doors,
roofs, walls etc. as may be necessary to exit from it and in such
manner as to cause minimal loss or damage as far as possible.
(14) Search must be made without carrying any objects other
than the clothes put on by the authority making search and any
employee deputed to assist the authority in making search and the
persons in whose presence the search is made pursuant to sub-section
(5) of Section 16 and the items to be used in the operation of search;
and the concerned person may, if he or she so wishes, search the
body of any such authority, employee or other persons prior to the
commencement of the operation of search.
(15) The authority who is competent to search any person,
house or place pursuant to this Section shall, prior to making such
search, show his or her identity card to the concerned house owner,
place owner or person to ensure that he or she is the authority
competent to make such search.
Requirement of presence in executing deeds: (1) The investigating
authority shall, in preparing a deed on the scene of crime, describing
the real and actual facts of the scene of such offence, prepare it in
accordance with sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 8.
In preparing a deed on the scene of crime pursuant to
sub-section (1) or searching any person, object or place or examining
the corpse, in the case of homicide, or, in the case of commission of
any other offence, in preparing necessary deeds depending on the
nature of such offence, such deed or deeds shall be executed in the
presence of at least two local people available at that place and one
member of the Local Level or if no such member is available, one
employee of the government office, if any, and the accused persons
who are found out as well as the informant.
Provided that such deed on the scene of crime shall not be
considered as unduly executed by the reason only that it has not been
executed in the presence of the accused or the informant.
In making a search of any place under the ownership or
charge of a person, the search shall be made in the presence of such
person also, if available.
Examination of corpse to be made: (1) If information is received
that a person is dead due to culpable homicide or accident or suicide
or in an unusual situation or in any other suspicious circumstance,
the investigating authority shall immediately go to the place where
the corpse is located and examine the corpse.
In examining the corpse pursuant to sub-section (1), a
deed containing, as far as practicable, the following matters, in the
form referred to in Schedule-14, and take photographs of the corpse
and the concerned scene in a manner to describe the actual situation
of the corpse:
The identifying description of the corpse,
The circumstances of the place where the corpse is
located and of the corpse,
If any wound, injury, bruise, abrasion or mark is seen on
the corpse, the description of each wound, injury,
bruise, abrasion or mark including the part where such
wound, injury, bruise, abrasion or mark is seen, the
number, length, breadth, depth and description thereof,
Description of the instrument causing such death and
the related description seen on the corpse, other than
those mentioned in clause (c),
Any such other sign or symptom seen on the corpse that
could be helpful in finding out the cause of death,
Description of other significant matters, if any.
The concerned investigating authority shall, upon
examining the corpse pursuant to sub-section (1), send the corpse to
a government medical doctor or an expert designated in that behalf
by the Government of Nepal or a licensed medical doctor for postmortem, at the government expenses.
The Government of Nepal shall make available to the
concerned police office such expenses as required for post-mortem
pursuant to sub-section (3).
A report of post-mortem conducted pursuant to subsection (3) shall be prepared in the form referred to in Schedule-15.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if, after the execution of the deed on examination of the corpse
pursuant to sub-section (1), it does not appear, from such
examination of corpse, that the death was caused as a result of the
commission of any offence or in a suspicious circumstance, and the
investigating authority concludes that the post mortem of the corpse
is not necessary, he or she shall execute a memorandum thereon,
setting out the reasons for the same, in the presence of distinguished
local persons and retain the memorandum in the case-file.
If it is not possible or seems impossible to examine the
corpse because of the corpse being decayed or rotted, the concerned
investigating authority shall execute a deed setting out that matter, in
the presence of local distinguished persons.
Provided that if, in spite of the corpse being decayed or rotten,
there is a situation that the cause of death can be found out by other
examination of the corpse or any of its parts, such other scientific
examination may be carried out.
After the completion of post mortem or execution of the
deed pursuant to sub-section (6), the concerned police employee
shall hand over the corpse to the successor to the deceased and get a
receipt from the latter.
If the successor refuses to receive the corpse pursuant to
sub-section (8) or no successor is present or the successor cannot be
identified, the concerned police employee shall perform the last rites
and rituals of the corpse at government expenses.
(10) If the investigating authority deems it appropriate to be
accompanied by the concerned expert in the course of examining the
corpse or conducting post mortem or collecting any other proof or
evidence, he or she may also be accompanied by such expert.
(11) If the expert or medical doctor examining a corpse or
conducting the post mortem pursuant to this Section thinks that it is
necessary to conduct the post mortem by a team consisting of more
than one expert in order to find out the real cause of death or the
investigating authority thinks that it is necessary to have the post
mortem conducted by a team of experts in order to find out the cause
of death of a person, the post mortem may be conducted by such
team.
Examination of physical evidence to be made: (1) If the
investigating authority thinks, in view of the nature of any offence,
that evidence related to that offence can be obtained if the
examination of the blood, semen, hair or any other part of body of
the concerned person or arms, thing or object, DNA or any other
matter is conducted in order to find out the offender, he or she may
cause the examination of such blood, semen, hair or other part of
body, arms, thing, object, DNA or any other physical evidence to be
conducted by a government medical doctor or recognized laboratory.
Provided that if it is required to examine any bodily organ of a
woman, such examination shall be caused to be conducted by any
female doctor, if available, and by a male doctor in the presence of a
woman if such female doctor is not available.
The concerned person shall assist the investigating
authority in the provision of a sample of blood, semen, hair or organ,
arms or object required for the examination pursuant to sub-section
The concerned doctor or laboratory shall prepare a
report of examination conducted pursuant to sub-section (1).
Examination of injury: (1) If any person sustains any injury,
wound, bruise, abrasion etc. on his or her body in an incident that
happened because of hurt and makes application for the examination
of injury or the investigating authority so requests, the government
doctor or health worker shall examine his or her injury, wound,
bruise, abrasion etc. and prepare a report of such examination in the
form referred to in Schedule-16.
If, in addition to that mentioned in sub-section (1), a
person held in detention in the course of investigation or any other
person on his or her behalf makes an application, accompanied by
the reasonable ground, stating that evidence may be found, upon the
examination of his or her body, that he or she has been subjected to
hurt or torture or any other offence has been committed to him or
her, the court may order that physical examination of such person be
conducted by a government doctor or a doctor or health worker
designated by the Government of Nepal.
Even in conducting physical examination pursuant to
sub-section (2), injury examination referred to in sub-section (1)
shall also be conducted.
The concerned doctor, expert or laboratory shall provide
a report of examination conducted pursuant to Sections 20, 21 and
this Section to the concerned office or investigating authority not
later than three days after the date of such examination, excluding
the time required for journey.
If it appears that a person held in detention was
subjected to hurt or torture as referred to in sub-section (2), the court
shall order the concerned police office to have treatment of the
person so subjected to hurt or torture, provide an interim relief to him
or her and take, in accordance with law, departmental action against
the person who so subjected him or her to hurt or torture.
If the investigating authority does not write to the
government doctor or health worker for the examination of injury
pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned person may make a
petition explaining that matter to the court, and the court may, if such
petition is made, send a precept to the government doctor or health
worker for such examination.
Expert opinion may be obtained: (1) The investigating authority
may, if he or she so deems necessary, be accompanied by any expert
in the course of investigation or seek opinion of any expert on any
matter connected with the offence.
It shall be the duty of the concerned expert to give his or
her opinion if he or she is so asked pursuant to sub-section (1).
The expert opinion given pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall be recorded in the case-file.
If any expert referred to in this Section is a nongovernmental person, the Government of Nepal shall provide
expenses to be incurred in the obtaining of his or her service.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the investigating authority, for the reason of the sensitivity
or complexity of any case, considers appropriate to do so, and makes
recommendation for obtaining the opinion of the medical board or
any other expert in such case, the Government of Nepal may form
such board.
If a board is formed pursuant to sub-section (5), the
board shall give opinion on that matter.
Identification to be made: (1) If it is necessary to identify any
person in connection with any case, a police employee whose rank is
at least assistant sub-inspector of police shall cause such
identification to be made.
Provided that the proceedings of a case shall not be affected
substantially by the reason only that such identification has not been
made.
In having identification pursuant to sub-section (1), the
person to be identified shall be kept in a place where such person
cannot be seen and looked, and at least four persons who resemble to
such person in age, color or physical structure shall, as far as
practicable, be dressed uniformly, with whom such person shall be
kept together, and every person making identification shall make
identification separately.
The form of identification shall be as referred to in
Schedule-17.
The matter as to whether the person making
identification was able to make identification pursuant to sub-section
(2) shall be recorded and retained in the case-file.
A police employee whose rank is at least assistant subinspector of police may cause to be made the identification of any
exhibit, thing or object connected with any case, by executing a deed
on identification.
Police diary to be maintained: (1) Every police officer conducting
investigation under this Chapter shall maintain a police diary, in the
form referred to in Schedule-18, in which every proceeding made by
him or her in the course of investigation shall be recorded
immediately.
Such police officer shall record the following matters in
the diary maintained pursuant to sub-section (1):
The date and time of receipt of information about the
offence, and the resume thereof,
The activities carried out by him or her in the course of
investigation,
The place or scene which he or she has visited in the
course of investigation,
The exhibits, proofs, evidence or other necessary things
found in the course of investigation,
Details of the person, if any, arrested in the course of
investigation,
The name, address of each person whom he or she has
interrogated in the course of investigation, and matters
stated by such person in relation to the offence,
Nature of the person arrested or inquired,
Other relevant fact or information obtained in the course
of investigation of the offence.
The government attorney or court may, as required,
procure and examine the police diary maintained pursuant to in subsection (1).
The authority higher than the concerned investigating
authority may, if he or she so wishes, inspect the matters set forth in
the diary maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) and also give
necessary direction in connection with the investigation.
Advice, opinion may be sought in relation to investigation: (1)
The concerned investigating authority may, in conducting
investigation pursuant to this Chapter, seek advice or opinion of the
government attorney on any matter.
If advice or opinion is sought pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned government attorney shall give his or her advice
or opinion.
If, in giving advice or opinion pursuant to sub-section
(2), the government attorney deems that it is necessary to carry out
further investigation into any matter or to collect further evidence or
to seize any exhibit, evidence or to inquire any person into any
matter, the government attorney may direct the investigating
authority to do, or cause to be done, accordingly.
It shall be the duty of the concerned investigating
authority to comply with the direction given pursuant to sub-section
Power of the Attorney General to give direction in the course of
investigation: (1) The Attorney General may obtain necessary
information about the investigation undergoing into any criminal
case to be filed by the Government of Nepal.
If, upon having information pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Attorney General is of the opinion that investigation into any
criminal offence which is a state case is insufficient or that any
special measure, method or mode required to be adopted or followed
have not been adopted or followed during investigation into such
offence or that further investigation should be conducted into such
offence, he or she may, at any time, give direction to the
investigating authority or the departmental head of that authority in
respect of the investigation.
It shall be the duty of the concerned authority to comply
with the direction given pursuant to sub-section (2).
Records of first information reports to be maintained: (1) The
investigating authority, in making petition to the court for a remand
to hold the arrested person in detention pursuant to sub-section (3) of

Section 14, shall submit one copy of the first information report or
information, which was made or given to the police office or the
investigating authority, to the adjudicating authority through the
government attorney.
The adjudicating authority shall maintain separate
records of the report or information referred to in sub-section (1).
Power to forward the matter to the concerned body:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if, in the
course of investigating into any offence under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2, it appears that the offence has to be investigated into
under other law, the matter, accompanied by the progress details of
investigation, may be forwarded to the concerned body or authority
for investigation into it.
Investigation into offence committed outside Nepal: (1) If there is
a legal provision that a case can be instituted in a court of Nepal in
relation to an offence that was committed or took place outside
Nepal, investigation conducted into such offence by fulfilling the
following procedures shall, notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, be deemed to have been duly conducted under
this Act:
Any investigation conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the treaty, if any, concluded with any
country providing that investigation into any criminal
offence, in respect of which a case may be instituted in a
court of Nepal, can be conducted by the competent
authorities of each other country,
Failing a treaty referred to in clause (a), any
investigation conducted by the investigating authority
designated in that behalf by the Government of Nepal,
by obtaining, through diplomatic channel, consent of,
and in cooperation with, the competent authority of the
country where the offence was committed,
In cases where any investigation cannot be conducted
pursuant to clause (a) or (b), investigation conducted by
the competent investigating officer of the country where
the offence was committed,
In cases where even the circumstance referred to in
clause (c) does not exist, investigation conducted by the
investigating authority of the area where the accused
was apprehended or of the area of his or her permanent
abode if the accused is not apprehended.
If the report of or documents related to the investigation
conducted pursuant to sub-section (1) has been executed in any
language other than the Nepali language, authentic Nepali translation
of such documents shall be submitted to the court.
If it appears from the investigation conducted pursuant
to sub-section (1) that a case has to be filed against any person, the
concerned government attorney shall frame a charge sheet and file
the case in the court in accordance with this Chapter.
Investigation report to be sent: (1) After
completion
investigation made into any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,
the investigating authority shall prepare an investigation report, in
the form referred to in Schedule-19, accompanied by the originals
and duplicates of the documents, and exhibits and evidence
contained in the case-file, setting out under which law any or all of
the persons suspected of committing the offence shall be punishable
if it appears that there is sufficient evidence to make indictment
against such accused, and setting out the relevant matter if it appears
that the offence has not been committed or in spite of the
commission of the offence, the accused cannot be traced out or that
there is no sufficient evidence to make indictment against any
accused, and send such report to the concerned government attorney
office.
The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sent at
least fifteen days in advance of the expiry of the statute of limitation
under the relevant law in relation to a case not involving a detainee,
and normally three days in advance of the day for filing a case, also
having regard to the time required to make decision of whether or
not to institute the case and the time required for preparing a charge
sheet and filing it in the court, in relation to a case involving a
detainee.
Upon receipt of the case-file, together with the
investigation report pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
government attorney office shall study the case-file, evaluate the
proofs and evidence collected in the course of investigation, and send
it to the Attorney General for decision to or not to institute the case.
Provided that where the Attorney General has delegated his or
her power to decide to or not to institute the case to the subordinate
officer, such case-file shall be sent to the concerned officer.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"subordinate officer" means the government attorneys under the
Attorney General, and this term also includes, unless otherwise
provided in the Constitution, any such officer or employee of the
Government of Nepal as authorized by the Attorney General to
institute any other case involving the Government of Nepal as the
plaintiff.
If, in studying a case-file in connection with making
decision of whether or not to institute a case pursuant to sub-section
(3), the government attorney deems it necessary to collect further
proof and evidence or conduct further investigation or make further
interrogation with any person, the government attorney may direct
the investigating authority to collect such proof and evidence or
conduct such further investigation or make interrogation with such
person and send the same.
If the government attorney gives direction to conduct
further investigation into the offence pursuant to sub-section (4), the
investigating authority shall complete further investigation within
fifteen days of the date of receipt of such direction.
If the investigating authority thinks that further
investigation referred to in sub-section (5) cannot be completed
within the time specified in that sub-section and any person is held in
detention, the investigating authority may release such person on
recognizance, with or without taking guarantee undertaken by a
reliable person.
If the investigating authority submits a report,
accompanied by the reason, to the government attorney under this
Section that a case cannot be instituted against any person, and any
person is held in detention in the course of investigation, the
investigating authority shall keep holding such person in detention
until the government attorney makes decision to or not to institute
the case.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, where decision has been made not to institute a case on any
offence set forth in Schedule-1 because of the absence of evidence
but any significant evidence is obtained subsequently, investigation
into such offence may be conducted again and the charge sheet may
be filed.

Chapter-3
Prosecution and Filing of Cases
To file charge sheets: (1) If, on studying a case-file in the course of
making decision to or not to institute a case pursuant to sub-section
(3) of Section 31, and in view of the proof and evidence collected,
the concerned government attorney considers that there is adequate
evidence for instituting the case, the concerned government attorney
shall, in relation to a case under Schedule-1 or 2, prepare a chargesheet, setting out the following matters, in the form referred to in
Schedule-20 and shall submit the charge sheet to the concerned court
within the time limit:
Full name, surname, address, description, age,
occupation or business of the accused,
Name of the father, mother, husband or wife of the
accused,
Village Body or Municipality where the accused is
residing, ward number, village, street, block number, if
available,
Description setting out the actual identity of the
accused, his or her photograph, duplicate copies of his
or her citizenship or passport, driving licence or other
document indicating his or her actual introduction,
Biometrics of pointing fingers of both hands of the
accused,
If the accused is staying in a rented house, details
including the name, surname and address of the house
owner,
The contents of the information related to the offence,
The particulars of the offence,
The details of exhibits and evidence in substantiation of
the commission of the offence by the accused,
The charge made against the accused, and the grounds
thereof and reasons therefor,
The relevant laws to be applied, and the reasons
therefor,
The demand for punishment to be imposed on the
accused, and the reasons therefor,
The amount of compensation, if any, required to be
awarded to the person who has sustained injury from the
offence,
Particulars of other necessary matters, if any, related to
the nature of the offence.
A charge sheet to be submitted pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be accompanied by the proofs, evidence, exhibits and
objects collected in connection with the offence, and the accused if
held in detention.
If the law gives any specific name to the offence alleged
to have been committed by the accused, the charge sheet to be
submitted pursuant to sub-section (1) shall mention that name in
connection with such offence.
If the law in force does not give any name to the offence
pursuant to sub-section (3), name shall be so given to the offence,
also having regard to the elements of the offence according to the
nature of the offence, that the accused can clearly understand the
charge made against him or her.
If information is received that the accused has already
been sentenced for any offence or the accused should be liable to
enhanced punishment by the reason that the accused has also been
previously convicted of any offence, the charge sheet filed pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall also mention the date of previous conviction
of the accused, the name of the court awarding the punishment and
the case or if such matter is discovered later, it shall be mentioned as
and when so discovered.
If the government attorney makes decision not to
institute a case against any person in connection with any offence
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31 owing to the fact that the
evidence and proof collected for the time being in connection with
that offence are not sufficient enough to institute the case against that
person, and if such offence also involves a matter of civil liability
related to the loss of and damage to the personal property or amount
of any person, the government attorney shall give information
thereof to the informant or the victim of such offence, through the
concerned investigating authority.
If, upon receipt of information referred to in sub-section
(6), the concerned person may, notwithstanding anything contained
in the law in force, file a case, if he or she so wishes, within sixty
days of the date of receipt of such notice, as if it were an offence
under Schedule-4.
If a case is instituted only against any person out of
more than one person subjected to investigation pursuant to this Act
or if investigation has been conducted as if it were a state case and
the investigation discloses that such case cannot be instituted as a
state case pursuant to this Act but can be instituted under other Act
and decision is made to that effect or such case can be instituted as
an individual case, the concerned government attorney shall
immediately send information thereof to the concerned High Court
Government Attorney Office and Office of Attorney General.
Upon receipt of the information pursuant to sub-section
(8), the High Court Government Attorney Office shall study such
matter and decide to or not to institute the case, and if there appears a
reasonable reason for instituting the case, it shall give direction,
accompanied by the reasons therefor, to the concerned government
attorney to institute the case; and upon receipt of such direction, such
government attorney shall file a charge sheet or supplementary
charge sheet and institute the case against those persons whom the
case was not instituted against.
(10) If the High Court Government Attorney Office decides
not to institute the case pursuant to sub-section (9), it shall give
information thereof to the Office of Attorney General.
(11) Upon receipt of the information under sub-section (10),
the Office of Attorney General shall be give necessary direction to
the concerned government attorney as to whether or not to institute
the case.
(12) If information is received under sub-section (8) that case
can be instituted under other law and such content is found
reasonable, the High Court Government Attorney Office shall give
information thereof to the concerned person.
(13) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, where a
bail/bond or guarantee has been taken from any person in the course
of investigation and, upon investigation, decision is made not to
institute the case against him or her, the bail/bond or guarantee so
furnished shall be returned to such person.
Filing of charge sheet claiming for lesser punishment: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
accused of any offence assists the investigating authority in the
course of conducting investigation into such offence, the
investigating authority may, in consideration for such assistance,
recommend to the government attorney for a reduction in the
sentence than can be imposed on such accused under the law.
If a recommendation is received pursuant to sub-section
(2), the government attorney may, also having regard to such
recommendation, file a charge sheet with conditional claims, with a
proposal for a reduction in the sentence that can be imposed on the
accused.
In filing a charge sheet pursuant to sub-section (2), the
government attorney may file the charge sheet proposing for a
reduction in the sentence as follows:
If the accused pleaded guilty of the offence in
whole, before the investigating authority or
prosecuting authority, a reduction of a maximum
of twenty-five percent of the sentence that can be
imposed on the accused,
If the accused pleaded guilty of the offence in
which he or she was also involved and assisted in
revealing detailed facts as to the offence and the
other offenders or gang involved in the offence or
the principal giving direction to commit the
offence or in arresting the persons involved in the
offence or, in the case of any organized offence
or offence committed in a group, in locating the
other persons involved in that offence or the place
where criminal conspiracy of such offence was
made, in seizing or forfeiting any motor vehicle,
machine, equipment or other object or arms used
for the commission of such offence, a reduction
of a maximum of fifty percent of the sentence that
can be imposed on the accused.
In order to make a pray for the reduction in the sentence
under sub-section (2), the documents contained in the case-file of the
concerned case shall clearly demonstrate that such accused has
rendered such assistance.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a pray cannot be made for the reduction in the sentence in
any of the following offences or circumstances:
If the accused has once availed of the facility under this
Section,
If the accused was sentenced to imprisonment, a period
of three years has not lapsed after the service of such
sentence,
If the accused has already been sentenced for the same
offence in which he or she is accused of.
If, after the filing of a charge sheet praying for a
reduction in the sentence pursuant to sub-section (2), the accused
makes before the court a deposition that is different from the
deposition which he or she has made before the investigating
authority or the government attorney or furnishes hostile evidence or
denies committing the offence or does not assist in judicial
proceedings, such accused shall not be entitled to get the facility
referred to in this Section.
In the case referred to in sub-section (6), the
government attorney shall revoke the reduction of sentence proposed
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) and make a petition to the court
praying for additional sentence, and such petition shall be an integral
part of the same charge sheet.
Cases on minor offences of specific type may not be filed: (1) If it
appears that it is not practicable to file a case on any minor offence
of any specific type or it does not substantially affect public interests,
the government attorney may, with the approval of the Attorney
General, decide not to file a case against such person.
Prior to making decision pursuant to sub-section (1), the
government attorney shall cause a bond to be executed by such
accused undertaking not to repeat such offence in the future.
For the purposes of this Section, the words "minor
offence of specific type" means any of the following offences:
Offence related to pickpocketing involving the
claimed amount of less than one thousand rupees,
committed for the first time,
Offence of begging committed for the first time,
Any other offence punishable by a sentence of a
fine not exceeding three thousand rupees or of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month
or both the sentences, committed for the first
time.
Prior to making decision not to institute a case pursuant
to this Section, the government attorney shall forfeit the claimed
amount of the offence.
The claimed amount forfeited pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be provided to the person, if any, victimized from the
offence and, failing such victim, to the victim relief fund established
under law.
If a case is not filed pursuant to sub-section (1) and such
person commits any offence under this Act within three years from
such date, such person shall be liable to the sentence to which the
sentence that can be imposed on him or her for the previous offence
shall also be added.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the government attorney makes decision not to institute a
case, the victim party who is not satisfied with such decision may file
a case on his or her own behalf.
If decision is made not to institute a case pursuant to
sub-section (7), a notice thereof shall be given to the victim
immediately; and, for that purpose, the statute of limitation under
law shall be deemed to commence from the date of receipt of the
notice of such decision.
The concerned government attorney shall provide
copies of the documents related to the investigation conducted
pursuant to this Chapter to the person who files a case pursuant to
sub-section (7).
Additional claim can be made: If, based on the other relevant
additional evidence found after a case has already been filed in the
court, it appears necessary to make a charge also against other
accused in that case, in addition to the accused against whom the
case has already been filed, or to make additional charge against the
person who has already been made accused upon the filing of the
case, the government attorney may, setting out the reasons therefor,
cause further investigation to be conducted, and file a case, making
additional claim against the other additional accused also.
Alterations in charge sheets: (1) If, by the reason that additional
evidence has been discovered in any case already filed in the court, it
appears necessary to alter the charge made previously in that case,
the concerned government attorney may, with the permission of the
Attorney General, make a petition, accompanied by the reasons
therefor, to the concerned court of first instance for alteration in the
charge sheet.
Upon receipt of such petition, the concerned court may,
if the contents thereof appear to be reasonable, give order to alter the
claim in the charge sheet in accordance with the petition.
Provided that an order to make such alteration shall be made
before the concerned court of first instance passes judgment.
Power to make order to correct minor errors: (1) If it is required
to correct minor errors in a charge sheet of a case filed in the court,
the concerned government attorney may make a petition,
accompanied by the reason therefor, to the concerned District Court.
If, upon examination of the petition made pursuant to
sub-section (1), it appears reasonable to correct the errors, the court
may make order for the correction of such errors.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"minor errors" means any typo, typing or printing related errors in
the name, surname, age or address of the accused.
Custody of exhibits, evidence and accused: (1) In submitting a
case-file, along with the investigation report, to the government
attorney for prosecution, the investigating authority shall have the
custody of the exhibits, evidence connected with the offence and the
accused and shall, if the concerned government attorney so orders,
produce the same before the concerned court at the same time.
Except as provided in sub-section (1), the concerned
police office shall, consequent upon the filing of a case in the court
pursuant to this Chapter, produce before the concerned government
attorney office the additional proof, evidence, object, document or
exhibit, if any, discovered in connection with the case, and such
government
attorney
office
shall,
making
necessary
examination, submit such document, exhibit or evidence to the court.
To retain safely: (1) If the government attorney makes decision not
to institute a case pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31, he or she
shall, as promptly as possible, return the exhibit, evidence and thing
including the case-file to the concerned police office.
The concerned police office shall safely retain the casefile, exhibit, evidence and thing received pursuant to sub-section (1)
until the statute of limitation for instituting the case on such offence
expires.
If the exhibit, evidence or thing referred to in subsection (1) is a property of any one, the police office shall return
such property to its owner, upon having a deed executed by him or
her with a bond to submit such property to the investigating authority
or court as and when so required.
Copy or information to be given: (1) The government attorney
shall give the concerned investigating authority and the accused a
copy of the decision, if any, made by him or her not to institute the
case pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 31 and a copy of the
charge sheet, if he or she has made decision to institute the case.
If, in any case under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, the
concerned government attorney makes decision to the effect that the
evidence is not sufficient enough to institute the case, he or she shall
give information of such decision to the concerned investigating
authority and the authority or office higher in level than such
investigating authority.
Notice to be given to informants or victims: If decision is made
not to institute a case in connection with any offence pursuant to subsection (3) of Section 31, the investigating authority shall, as soon as
possible, give information thereof, accompanied by the reason
therefor, to the informant or victim.
Concerned person to be made party: (1) If, while proceeding with
a case, in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff, filed under this
Act, it seems that the case does not fall under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2 but any other case may be instituted in accordance with
law, the court shall make order to that effect and give information
thereof to the concerned person.
If the concerned person agrees to take over/continue the
case within two months from the date of receiving such information,
that person shall be treated as the plaintiff and the case proceeded
and adjudicated, based on the case-file of the same case in
accordance with law.
Filing of cases: (1) The following authority or person may file the
following case required to be filed under this Act in the concerned
court:
The concerned government attorney, in relation to a
case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2, in the form of a charge sheet,
The Government of Nepal, constitutional body, court or
any public authority, in relation to a case related to any
offence under Schedule-3, in the form of a compliant or
report,
The concerned person or one who has locus standi to
file case, in relation to a case related to any offence
under Schedule-4, in the form of a plaint.
If a case is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), such case
shall be deemed to have been filed under this Act.
Exemption from sentence for making allegation or complaint: (1)
No person shall be liable to sentence for making any allegation or
complaint in connection with any case under Schedule-1, Schedule-2
or Schedule-3.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if, after the case has been instituted in the court consequent upon
investigation into the case based on the allegation or complaint made
by any person, standing as a witness and showing any matter,
evidence or proof to the belief of the Government of Nepal, police
employee or other authority, such matter, evidence or proof turns out
to be false or fabricated on the basis of a report, complaint or
deposition made by any person or the deposition of any witness or
informant or any other ground, the court may examine the evidence
from the same case-file and do the following:
To sentence the witness who has made a false statement
or fabricated deposition to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five
thousand rupees or both the sentences,
Provided
sentence
imprisonment shall not exceed half the sentence that
may be imposed on the offender.
In the event of the court being of the opinion that the
informant has made such false allegation or produced
false
fabricated
evidence
being
guided
premeditation or jealousy without the existence of any
reasonable ground for making the allegation, to cause a
reasonable compensation, in view of the nature and
circumstance of the case, to be paid by such witness to
the defendant to be acquitted, in relation to the same
case.
Provided that if such person furnishes a
reasonable reason for the report or witness made by him
or her to be prejudicial, no compensation shall be
awarded.

Chapter-4
Jurisdiction of Court
Offences to be tried by court having jurisdiction over area where
offences committed: The power to proceed and adjudicate any case
related to any offence shall be vested in the court having jurisdiction
over the area where such offence is committed.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with law, constitute a separate criminal court or criminal bench in
any district for the proceeding and adjudication of such cases.
Offences connected with different areas to be tried by court
having jurisdiction over any of such areas: In the following
circumstances, a court having jurisdiction over any area may proceed
and adjudicate the case:
If any act constituting the offence is done partly in one
area and partly in another, by a court having jurisdiction
over any of such areas,
If any act is done in one area and the offence arises in
another area as the consequence of such act, by a court
having jurisdiction over any of such areas,
If different offences take place in different areas from
the same event, by a court having jurisdiction over any
of such areas where any of such offences takes place,
If an offence is committed in several areas but it cannot
be determined in which area the act constituting the
offence has been completed, by a court having
jurisdiction over any of such areas,
In the case of any offence related to kidnapping or
hostage-taking, by a court having jurisdiction over
either the area where such offence is committed or the
area where the kidnapped person or hostage is held,
concealed or detained,
If the offence is one committed by or against any person
performing a journey or one committed in relation to
any goods being transported from one place to another,
by a court having jurisdiction over either the area where
the offence begins or the area where such person visits
in the course of journey or the area where such goods
are seized or traverse,
If the preparation or criminal conspiracy of any offence
is made in one area but the act constituting that offence
is accomplished in another area, by any court having
jurisdiction over either the area where such preparation
or conspiracy is made or the area where the act
constituting such offence is accomplished,
If any offence is committed by means of any letter or
other communication or information technology, by any
court having jurisdiction over either the area where such
letter, communication or information was sent from or
the area where the same was received,
If an offence is committed along the boundary between
two countries, by the court adjoining to such boarder,
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, the term
"boarder" includes the no-man's land along the
boundary between two countries.
In the case of an offence related to property, by the
court having jurisdiction over either the area where such
offence is committed or the area where the property
earned from the offence is concealed, purchased, sold or
otherwise exchanged,
In the case of any case related to any offence over
which universal jurisdiction can be exercised by virtue
of any law or any treaty to which Nepal or the
Government of Nepal is a party, by such court as
designated by the Government of Nepal.
Jurisdiction to try offences committed outside Nepal: If the law in
force provides for punishment in respect of any offence committed
outside Nepal or on an aircraft or ship registered in Nepal, such
offence shall be proceeded and adjudicated by the court of the
district where the person accused of such offence is found and by the
District Court of the area where such accused has permanent abode,
if such accused is not found.
Proceeding and adjudication of cases filed in two courts or
bodies: (1) Where a case related to any offence, falling under the
jurisdiction of more than one court, is filed in more than one court,
the case on such offence shall be proceeded and adjudicated by the
court in which it has been filed earlier, and, where the case has been
filed on the same day, by the court designated by the court hearing
appeals from such court where the courts are under the jurisdiction of
the same appeal hearing court, and by the court designated by the
Supreme Court where the courts are under the jurisdiction of the
different appeal hearing courts.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a case related to any one offence, falling under the jurisdiction
of the court and a quasi-judicial body, is filed in the court and the
quasi-judicial body, such case shall be proceeded and adjudicated by
the court.
Where a case is one which falls under the jurisdiction of
courts or judicial bodies of different types, the case shall be
proceeded and adjudicated by the respective court or body competent
under law, even if it is liable to joint proceedings under sub-section
(1), and clause (a) or (c) of sub-section (2), of Section 54. .
Cases under jurisdiction of both higher and lower courts to be
tried by higher court: If a case related to an offence falls under the
jurisdiction of both the higher and the lower courts pursuant to the
law in force or if a case related to a person or offence which is liable
to joint proceeding under Section 54, being under the jurisdiction of
both the higher and the lower courts, can be so filed or has been filed
in such courts, the higher court shall have power to try such case.
Endorsement to be made in cases of lacking jurisdiction or
failing to meet requirements: (1) If, it appears to the court, from
the contents of any charge sheet or complaint made to it, that the
court is not competent to proceed and adjudicate the case complained
or that the complaint does not meet the requirements, the court shall
make an endorsement to that effect in that charge sheet or complaint.
In the case of a complaint which is endorsed pursuant to
sub-section (1) by the reason of the lack of jurisdiction, where the
day on which such endorsement is made is the deadline of the statute
of limitation, the proper court shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in the law in force, register the complaint in accordance
with law if it is made not later than fifteen days after that day
excluding the time required for journey.
Decision as to jurisdiction and statute of limitation to be made:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where
the accused, in making statement in relation to any case, or the
defendant, in filing a memorandum of defence, raises a question that
the court lacks jurisdiction or the statute of limitation has expired,
the court shall initiate other proceedings in such case only after
deciding such question, and if the case does not appear to fall under
its jurisdiction, the court shall order that it be presented to the proper
court.
A petition may be made to the appeal hearing court
against the decision made pursuant to sub-section (1), not later than
thirty-five days of the date of such decision.
A question settled pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2)
shall not be raised again in the appeal hearing court.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to an interlocutory
order made in the course of proceeding of the case.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Preliminary Proceedings of Cases
Commencement of proceedings by the court upon filing of cases:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the court shall
commence proceedings in a case related to any offence upon its
filing in the court pursuant to this Chapter.
Provided that:
On an offence of disregarding a court order or contempt
of court in any other manner, the court can proceed the
case even upon taking a summary statement or written
explanation of the accused or upon any other petition or
report,
Where, in examining evidence in a case by the court,
any party makes deposition alleging that any evidence is
a forged or fraudulent one, the case may, on the basis of
that deposition, be proceeded on the offence of fraud or
forgery or on the offence of aid and abetment, making
criminal conspiracy or accomplice to such offence, from
the same case-file.
Except in cases where the proceedings of case have
commenced, pursuant to clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1),
on the charge of committing any offence referred to in Section 81 or
82 of Chapter-3, Sections 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 97, 98 or 100 of

Chapter-4, of Part-2 of the Penal Code, or abetment of, criminal
conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, any such offence, the court
may, if it thinks justifiable to institute the case on the basis of a
petition, report, deposition or any separate complaint, proceed the
case by executing a memorandum of order, accompanied by the
reason therefor.
Any case set forth in sub-section (2) shall be proceeded
and adjudicated in conjunction with the case of the main offence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, except with the written approval of the Government of
Nepal or departmental head, no case shall be instituted accusing any
employee of the Government of Nepal of any offence alleged to have
been committed by such employee while acting in the discharge of
his or her official duty.
Provided that if any employee commits any offence by doing
any act beyond his or her official duty, approval of the Government
of Nepal or departmental head shall not be required to institute a case
on such offence alleged to have been committed by him or her.
No case may be instituted against any person on any of
the offences under Schedule-1 and Schedule-2, without filing a
charge sheet by the government attorney.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5),
the following person may make a separate complaint for the
reparation of any injury resulted from any offence:
A person who has suffered injury from the offence,
In the case of any matter requiring compliant by a
public servant who is deputed elsewhere or abroad in
the course of his or her employment, any of his or her
immediate successors,
In relation to any act or thing required to be done or
preserved by any person by virtue of any post, office or
any other capacity, the person holding such post, office
or capacity,
In relation to any matter in which a person with
disability, child or person over seventy-five years of age
or person who is physically or mentally incompetent is
entitled to make complaint, his or her successor living
in the joint family and, failing such successor, any other
successor or guardian,
In relation to any offence involving any body corporate,
the director, member, administrator or chief executive
officer who is authorized to act as the chief of such
body.
Complaint may be made: (1) Except as otherwise provided in this
Act, the following person may file a complaint in relation to any
offence in the court:
A person who has suffered injury from the offence,
In the case of any matter requiring compliant by a
public servant who is deputed elsewhere or abroad in
the course of his or her employment, any of his or her
immediate successors,
In relation to any act or thing required to be done or
preserved by any person by virtue of any post, office or
any other capacity, the person holding such post, office
or capacity,
In relation to any matter in which a person with speech
or visual impairment, child or person over seventy-five
years of age or person who is physically or mentally
incompetent is entitled to make complaint, his or her
successor living in the joint family and, failing such
successor, any other successor or guardian,
In relation to any offence involving any body corporate,
the director, member, administrator or chief executive
officer who is authorized to act as the chief of such
body.
A complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the
following matters and be in the form referred to in Schedule-21:
The name, surname, address (including the street),
description, age, occupation or business of the accused,
the name of his or her father, mother, husband or wife,
The citizenship, passport, driving license of the accused
or his or her other descriptions that could enable to find
him or her easily,
The Village Body or Municipality where the accused is
residing or staying, ward number, village, street, block
number, if available, and other descriptions of the
accused to the extent of availability,
If the accused is staying in a rented house, the name,
surname and address of the house owner, to the extent
of availability,
If the accused has no permanent abode, the name,
surname and address of the owner of house where the
accused is staying,
The particulars related to the offence,
Where the offender has committed more than one
offence at the same time, each count of charge made
against him or her, and evidence related thereto,
The relevant law to be applied, and the reason for the
same,
The sentence demanded to be imposed on the accused,
and the ground for the same,
injury
caused
offence,
compensation has to be recovered from the accused, the
amount of such compensation and the ground for the
same,
Other necessary matters.
Any complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
accompanied by such number of copies of the complaint as that of
the accused and one copy each of the documentary evidences
intended to be produced by the complainant.
Provided that it is not required to submit copies of the
complaint and documentary evidences in a case in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff.
Cases can be instituted together: (1) A case may be instituted
against the following persons upon the same charge sheet, report,
complaint, plaint or memorandum of order:
Persons who commit the same offence or different
offences on the same occasion,
Persons who commit one or more than one offence
jointly or in connivance with each other,
Persons who commit various offences related to each
other.
In the case of the persons involved in the following
offence, a case may be instituted upon the same charge sheet, report,
complaint, plaint or memorandum of order:
Attempt, criminal conspiracy to commit, or abetment of,
the offence,
Accomplice to the offence,
Offence of possessing, buying, selling, giving or taking
any thing acquired from the offence,
Offence of possessing, buying, selling, giving or taking
any thing with the intention of committing the offence, or
Offence of hiding any person connected with the
offence or aiding such person to abscond.
Separate complaint to be made in relation to each offence or
accused: Except as otherwise provided in Sections 53 and 54, a
separate charge sheet, complaint or memorandum of order shall be
framed or made in relation to each offence or accused.
Government of Nepal to be made as plaintiff: A case related to
any of the offences under Schedule-1 and Schedule 2, other than a
case instituted upon a complaint referred to in sub-section (2) of

Section 52, shall be proceeded by making the Government of Nepal
as the plaintiff.

Chapter-6
Warrant for Arrest and Summons
Summons or warrant for arrest to be issued: (1) After
complaint has been made pursuant to this Act, the court shall, subject
to this Chapter, issue a summons or warrant for arrest, as required, to
enforce the appearance of any accused who is not present along with
the complaint in a case related to an offence set forth in Schedule-1
and Schedule2.
The court shall, pursuant to sub-section (1), issue a
warrant for arrest to enforce the appearance of the accused of the
following offence:
A heinous or grave offence,
An offence of attempt to, abetment of, or criminal
conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, any offence set
forth in clause (a) or offence of hiding the accused of
such offence or aiding such accused to abscond.
The court may, as required, issue a summons to enforce
the appearance of the accused of any offence other than that referred
to in sub-section (2).
Provided that if the court has a reasonable reason to believe
that the accused has absconded and his or her arrest is unlikely or the
accused fails to appear before the court within the time limit
specified in the summons, the court may issue a warrant for arrest
pursuant to sub-section (2), in the case of such accused.
The court may issue a warrant for arrest to arrest and
produce any person who is bound to produce any document, exhibit
or evidence required to be produced before the court if there is a
reasonable reason to believe that such person is likely to conceal or
destruct such document, exhibit or evidence or such person fails to
produce such document, exhibit or evidence before the court within
the time limit specified in the summons issued pursuant to subsection (3).
With the issuance of a warrant for arrest pursuant to
sub-section (4), the court may order any employee or police officer
to search the place where the document, exhibit or evidence referred
to in that Section is kept and produce such document, exhibit or
evidence before the court.
The employee or police officer referred to in sub-section
(5) shall search any place in accordance with Section 18.
A summons or warrant for arrest to be issued by the
court under this Section to enforce the appearance of any accused
shall be accompanied by a notice, in the form referred to in
Schedule-22, indicating, inter alia, the contents of the complaint.
Procedure for issuing warrant for arrest: (1) A warrant for arrest
to be issued by the court pursuant to this Chapter shall clearly state
the full name and address of the person to be arrested and the reason
for arrest and be in the form referred to in Schedule-23 in the case of
an accused person and in the form referred to in Schedule-24 in the
case of a witness and other person.
A warrant for arrest issued pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be signed by the concerned authority and bear the seal of the
court.
While issuing a warrant for arrest pursuant to subsection (1), the warrant for arrest shall be directed to the police office
of the area where the person to be arrested is or likely to be residing
or staying.
Provided that the court may, if it deems so necessary, also
direct a warrant for arrest to the employee of the court.
A warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this Section shall
remain valid unless and until it is executed or canceled by the court.
A person to whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
may be arrested pursuant to such warrant, and while arresting a
person in pursuance thereof, the warrant for arrest shall be shown to,
and the notice sent pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section 57 shall
also be delivered to, that person.
A person who has been arrested under a warrant for
arrest shall immediately be produced before the concerned court as
soon as possible but not later than twenty-four hours, excluding the
time required for journey.
If the person to be arrested under a warrant for arrest is
not found within seven days after the date of receipt by the police of
the warrant for arrest, the concerned police office shall continue to
search that person, and, subsequent thereto, proceed to his or her
house and deliver the 35-day-warrant for arrest issued to him or her,
in the form referred to in Schedule-25, to any of his or her family
member of legal age, residing jointly with him or her, and retain a
receipt thereof in the case-file.
If the person referred to in sub-section (7) refuses to
acknowledge such warrant or is not found, a copy of the warrant
shall be affixed to his or her house in presence of a member of the
concerned ward committee of the Local Level, and if such member is
not available, in presence of at least two local persons, and one copy
thereof shall be delivered to the court.
A copy of the warrant affixed to the house where the
concerned person is residing or staying pursuant to sub-section (8)
shall also be delivered to the concerned ward office of the Local
Level and a receipt of its acknowledgement shall be retained in the
case-file.
(10) If a warrant is delivered to it pursuant to sub-section (9),
the concerned ward office of the Local Level shall, upon receipt of
such warrant, give information thereof to the concerned person and
also affix it to its notice board.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a person under the warrant for arrest appears himself or
herself before the court prior to being arrested, he or she shall be
arrested and hearing shall be held under law as to whether or not he
or she has to be held in detention, and the warrant for arrest issued to
him or her previously shall be voided and information thereof given
to the concerned authority.
(12) If the court comes to know upon a petition by the party
or through any other means that the person under the warrant for
arrest is staying in any district other than his or her address, the court
may also direct the warrant for arrest to the district where he or she is
staying.
(13) If any accused does not appear within the time limit
specified in the warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this Chapter and
remains absconded or the actual address of the accused cannot be
discovered or the place where the accused is staying cannot be found
out, the court may publish a notice, containing the description of
such accused, in any national daily newspaper and affix the notice to
the notice board of the concerned court.
(14) Upon the publication of a notice pursuant to sub-section
(13), the accused shall be deemed to have duly received the notice,
and any police office or employee may, at any time, arrest and
produce him or her.
(15) The court may, at any time after the affixation of the
notice pursuant to sub-section (8), order the attachment of any
property belonging to the person under the warrant for arrest.
(16) If an order for the attachment of property is made
pursuant to sub-section (15), the court shall affix a notice of such
attachment to its notice board and give information thereof to the
concerned Land Revenue Office or other body or organization.
(17) If it receives a precept from the court for the attachment
of property pursuant to such-section (16), the concerned Land
Revenue Office or other body or organization shall immediately
attach such property and give information thereof to the court
making such attachment order.
(18) If a property attachment order is made by the court
pursuant to sub-section (15), such property shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in the law in force, be deemed to have been
attached with effect from the date of such order.
(19) After the person to be arrested pursuant to this Chapter
appears in the court, the court shall, irrespective of the stage of the
proceeding of the case, order the concerned Land Revenue Office or
other body or organization to immediately release the property of
such person which has been attached pursuant to this Section.
Procedure for issuing summons: (1) While issuing a summons to
an accused person pursuant to this Act, the court shall issue it,
specifying the date for making appearance in the court.
The summons referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
issued to the accused, in the form referred to in Schedule-26, at least
fifteen days before the date specified for his or her appearance, if it is
a case other than one under Schedule-4, and in the form referred to in
Schedule-27, giving a time-limit of fifteen days if the case is related
to an offence set forth in Schedule-4.
Where a summons has not been served at least fifteen
days in advance of the time-limit specified pursuant to sub-section
(2) for making appearance but has been served prior to the time-limit
specified for making appearance, and the accused is unable to appear
on the date specified, the accused may make a petition to the court,
accompanied by the reason for failure to so appear, within fifteen
days of the service of the summons, for the specification of another
time-limit for making appearance.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court may so specify another date for his or her appearance that such
date falls within a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of
such petition.
In the case of an accused who does not appear within
the time-limit specified in the summons served pursuant to this
Section, the court may, if it considers necessary to have the accused
arrested and produced before it, issue a warrant for arrest pursuant to
the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section of 57.
Provided that if the accused makes a petition showing that he
or she was not able to appear within the specified time-limit due to a
force majeure event and the court holds the contents of such petition
to be reasonable, the court may order the extension of the time-limit
for a period not exceeding fifteen days, after the termination of the
period of existence of the force majeure event, excluding the time
required for journey.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act, the term "period of
existence of the force majeure event" means the following period:
If a person required to appear before the court had to
observe obsequies or mourning on his or her own
according to his or her tradition, at the demise of any
one of him or her, a period of seven days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date on which a
period of fifteen days of the death of such person
elapsed,
If a person required to appear before the court is a
woman and delivered a child, a period of sixty days
from the date of delivery, excluding the time required
for journey,
If the route remained closed due to flood, landslide or
snow-fall or means of public transportation did not ply
due to declaration of curfew or any other reason during
the time-limit specified for appearance before the court,
a period of fifteen days, excluding the time required for
journey, from the date of resumption of such route or
means of public transportation,
If there occurred a calamity such as earthquake or
volcano eruption during the time-limit specified for
appearance before the court, a period of ten days,
excluding the time required for journey, from the date of
occurrence of such calamity,
If a person required to appear before the court was
kidnapped or taken into hostage by any one, a period of
fifteen days, excluding the time required for journey,
from the date of being released from such kidnapping or
hostage-taking,
If a person required to appear before the court, because
of being unconscious or unable to make movement or
seriously ill because of any accident, and thereby being
unable to appear within the time-limit specified for the
same, was admitted to a hospital recognized by the
Government of Nepal for treatment, a period until he or
she is discharged from the hospital, not exceeding
fifteen days in the case of a party to a case under
Schdule-4 and not exceeding three months in the case of
a party to any other case.
In the circumstances referred to in clauses (a) and (e) of
sub-section (5), the concerned person shall, as far as possible, give a
notice thereof to the court immediately.
Summons may be issued in the name of witness: In issuing a
summons in the name of a witness pursuant to this Act, the court
shall issue the summons, stating the necessary matters, in the form
referred to in Schedule-28.
Service of summons: (1) The court shall issue a summons in
triplicate, and the service of summons shall be executed by any
police employee, any employee of the court or any such other
government office as the court may direct.
A summons issued pursuant to this Act shall, to the
extent possible, be served personally on the person summoned, by
delivering it to him or her.
Where the person summoned cannot be found, or,
despite being found, refuses to acknowledge the summons being
served pursuant to sub-section (2), the summons may be delivered to
any of his or her joint family members, who has completed at least
eighteen years of age.
If the concerned person or joint family member is not
found or, despite being found, such person or even such member
refuses to acknowledge the summons pursuant to such-section (3),
the serving employee shall affix one of the duplicates of the
summons to the house or house-door of that person in the presence
of one member of the concerned ward of the Local Level and of at
least two local persons, who as well as the serving employee shall
affix signature or thumb impression thereon, and deliver one copy
thereof to the concerned ward committee of the concerned Local
Level and submit one copy of the served summons to the court.
The concerned ward office of the Local Level shall affix
to its notice board a notice corresponding to the summons received
pursuant to sub-section (4).
If at least two local persons and at least one member of
the concerned ward committee of the Local Level certify that the
person summoned pursuant to sub-section (5) does not reside in the
place specified in the summons, the summons shall be returned to the
court, indicating the address of his or her residence, if any,
discovered, and indicating the matter to that effect if such address
cannot be discovered.
If a summons is returned pursuant to sub-section (6), the
court may direct the summons to the place of his or her residence
and, as required, issue another summons setting out the address, as
required, in consultation also with the plaintiff.
While serving a summons on any office-bearer or
employee of the Government of Nepal or any body corporate, the
summons may be served at the office where such office-bearer or
employee is serving.
Where a summons is received for service pursuant to
sub-section (8), the chief of such office or body available for the time
being shall serve the summons by delivering one copy of the
summons to the concerned office-bearer or employee, and, as far as
practicable, cause the other copy to be signed by the concerned
office-bearer or employee, stating the manner and date of its service,
and return that copy to the court.
(10) If a summons cannot be served pursuant to sub-section
(9), such summons shall be affixed to the notice board of the
concerned office or body. A report on such affixation to the notice
board shall be given to the concerned court.
(11) If, in serving a summons pursuant to sub-section (8),
such officer-bearer or employee is on leave, the concerned office or
body shall promptly give a notice of such service of summons to
such employee.
(12) If a summons is to be served on any body corporate, a
copy of the summons shall be delivered to the central or local office
of such body, and the receipt thereof shall be submitted to the court.
(13) If a summons is served at the local office pursuant to
sub-section (12), the summons shall be deemed to have been served
at the headquarters of such body.
(14) In serving a summons pursuant to this Section, the
serving employee shall submit to the court a report containing the
date and details of the service.
(15) If any court is required to serve a summons on a person
who is residing in any area outside its jurisdiction, the court shall
send the summons to the court of that area and cause it to be served
through that court, and that court shall cause the summons to be
served in accordance with this Chapter and return a copy thereof to
the court issuing the summons.
(16) In serving a summons pursuant to this Section, the
notice sent to the accused person pursuant to sub-section (7) of

Section 57 shall also be delivered or, depending on the situation,
affixed to the house-door, together with the summons.
Summons may be served through print or electronic
communication media: (1) If any summons cannot be served
pursuant to Section 61, the court may serve the summons by
publishing the contents of such summons in such national daily
newspaper or broadcasting through electronic communication media
as owned by the Government of Nepal.
If a summons is published or broadcast pursuant to subsection (1), the summons shall be deemed to have been duly served.
Service of arrest for warrant: (1) The court shall issue a warrant
for arrest in triplicate, and the warrant for arrest shall, if practicable,
be served personally on the person warranted.
The person warranted shall acknowledge the warrant for
arrest issued pursuant to sub-section (1)
If the person warranted cannot be found to serve the
warrant for warrant being served pursuant to sub-section (1), the
warrant may be delivered to any of his or her joint family members
who has completed at least eighteen years of age.
If the concerned person or any joint family member is
not found pursuant to sub-section (3) or, despite being found, such
person or family member refuses to acknowledge the warrant, the
serving employee shall affix one of the duplicates of the warrant to
the house-door of that person in the presence of a member of the
concerned ward of the Local Level and of at least two local persons,
who as well as the serving employee shall affix signature or thumb
impression thereon, and deliver one copy thereof to the concerned
ward office of the Local Level and submit one copy of the served
warrant for arrest to the court.
The concerned ward committee of the Local Level shall
affix to its notice board a notice corresponding to the warrant for
arrest received pursuant to sub-section (4).
If at least two local persons and at least one member of
the concerned ward committee of the Local Level certify that the
person to be arrested pursuant to the warrant for arrest issued under
sub-section (5) does not reside in the place specified in the warrant,
the warrant for arrest shall be returned to the court, indicating the
address of his or her residence, if any, discovered, and indicating the
matter to that effect if such address cannot be discovered.
If a warrant for arrest is returned pursuant to sub-section
(6), the court may direct the warrant for arrest to the place of his or
her residence and, as required, issue another warrant for arrest setting
out the address, as required, in consultation also with the plaintiff.
In serving a warrant for arrest pursuant to this Section,
the serving employee shall submit to the court a report containing the
date and details of the service.
If any court is required to serve a warrant for arrest on a
person who is residing in any area outside its jurisdiction, the court
shall send the warrant for arrest to the court of that area and cause it
to be served through that court, and that court shall cause the warrant
for arrest to be served in accordance with this Chapter and return a
copy thereof to the court issuing it.
(10) If an employee making a report referred to in subsection (8) makes a report setting out the reason for not being able to
effect the service of a warrant for arrest in pursuance of the
procedures set forth in this Section, the warrant for arrest issued to
the concerned person may, notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Section, be served by publishing the warrant in a
national daily newspaper owned by the Government of Nepal, and
the warrant for arrest so served shall be deemed to have been duly
served.
(11) In serving a warrant for arrest, the notice sent to the
accused person pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section 57 shall also be
delivered or, depending on the situation, affixed to the house-door of
him or her, together with the warrant for arrest.
Warrant for arrest or summons may be issued to or served on
accused residing in foreign country: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a warrant for arrest is to be
issued to or a summons is to be served on a person who is accused of
an offence sub judice in any court and staying or residing in a foreign
country, the warrant for arrest or summons may be issued to or
served on such person in accordance with the law in force on mutual
legal assistance.
If the Government of Nepal receives information as to
the service of a warrant for arrest or summons issued pursuant to
sub-section (1), it shall give such information to the concerned court.
If a warrant for arrest or summons issued pursuant to
sub-section (1) cannot be served, such warrant or summons may be
served by publishing it in such national daily newspaper as owned by
the Government of Nepal or broadcasting it through electronic
communication media.
If a warrant for arrest is issued or summons served
pursuant to sub-section (1), such warrant or summons shall be
deemed to have been duly issued or served in accordance with this
If a warrant for arrest is issued pursuant to sub-section
(1) and the police of the concerned country arrests and hands over
the accused to any police office, the accused shall be produced
before the concerned court as soon as possible but not later than
twenty-four hours, excluding the time required for journey.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, nothing shall prevent the institution of proceeding and
adjudication of a case by the reason only that the warrant for arrest or
summons could not be issued to or served on any person staying or
residing in a foreign country, in accordance with this Section.
Special provisions relating to absconding persons: (1) In the case
of a person against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
pursuant to this Chapter but who is not arrested because of not being
found or in the case of a person who is absconding and failing to
appear before the court, the following matters shall be dealt with as
follows, with effect from the following day of the expiry of thirty
days after the date of issuance of such warrant to the day on which
he or she appears before the court:
If such person is an incumbent office-bearer or
employee of the Government of Nepal, State
Government, Local Level, constitutional body or any
government office, a body corporate, educational or
academic institution under full or partial ownership or
control of the Government of Nepal, State Government,
Local Level, or any other public body, he or she shall be
deemed to have ipso facto been suspended from his or
her office,
If an attachment to the property belonging to such
person has not been effected pursuant to sub-section
(15) of Section 58, the attachment of the immovable
property belonging to him or her shall be effected
pursuant to that sub-section,
If it is required to renew any industry, trade or business
or income tax registration firm, license, industry etc.
held in the name of, or under sole ownership of, such
person, the act of renewal shall automatically be
withheld,
Transaction on securities held in the name of such
person shall ipso facto be withheld,
Facilities such as salary, allowance, gratuity and
pension receivable by such person in accordance with
law shall be deemed to have ipso facto been withheld,
Any interest, royalty or facility to be acquired by such
person from any intellectual property right such as a
patent, design, trademark and copyright shall be
considered to have ipso facto been withheld,
If any bank account held in the name of such person is
known, and a request is made to withhold the
transaction of such account, such bank account shall be
considered to have ipso facto been withheld,
If it is so requested not to provide a citizenship
certificate, passport or land ownership registration
certificate to such person in accordance with law, the
concerned body shall not provide the citizenship
certificate, passport or land ownership certificate to him
or her,
If it is known that such person is staying or residing
outside Nepal, the extradition proceeding may be
initiated if such person can be extradited under a treaty
to which the Government of Nepal is a party or under
the law in force, and failing such circumstance, in view
of the gravity of the offence, a request may be made
through the diplomatic channel to the concerned country
or relevant international organization to arrest such
person.
The court shall give a notice thereof to the concerned
authority or body in order to make effective the provisions referred
to in sub-section (1).
Process may be served at court: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, any process or notice issued by
any court to the following person may, in the following
circumstance, be served by delivering it to such person at the court
itself:
In the case of an employee or office-bearer of the
concerned court, at the time when he or she
makes attendance in the court,
In the case of a party who is remanded on
recognizance in another case in the concerned
court, at the time when the party appears on the
appointed date for appearance,
In the case of an attorney who represents any
party in any case in the concerned court, at the
time when the attorney appears for such
representation,
In the case of a law practitioner who appears in
the concerned court in the course of law practice,
at the time when he or she appears in the course
of such practice, or
In the case of a person who appears as a witness,
at the time when he or she appears in that
capacity.
If a process or notice issued by the court in the name of
any person referred to in sub-section (1) is tendered for delivery
when the person appears in the concerned court, the person shall
receive it.
If any person refuses to acknowledge such process or
notice tendered for delivery pursuant to sub-section (2), the process
server shall give a report thereof to the concerned court immediately.
If the content of the report made pursuant to sub-section
(3) seems to be reasonable, the court shall make an order to prevent
such person from representing a party, receiving the appointed date
for appearance in capacity of an attorney, doing law practice or
making deposition in the capacity of witness in the court until he or
she acknowledges such process or notice.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Detention, Bail and Guarantee
To hold the accused in detention: (1) If, based on the evidence
available for the time being, any person accused of the following
offence appears to be guilty of the offence or there is any reasonable
ground, based on such evidence, to believe that such person is guilty
of the offence, the court may remand such person in detention for
trial, recording the reason for such detention:
Any offence punishable by the sentence of
imprisonment for life,
Any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2
which
punishable
sentence
imprisonment for a term exceeding three years, or
An offence of attempt to, abetment of, or criminal
conspiracy to, or being accomplice to, the offence
set forth in clause (a) or (b).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the court may, in any of the following circumstances, remand such
accused in detention for trial as may be punishable by a sentence of
imprisonment in accordance with law:
If the accused pleads guilt of the charge made
against him or her before the court,
If the accused charged with an offence punishable
by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year or more has no permanent abode in Nepal
and there is a possibility that the accused might
abscond
might
apprehended
subsequently if he or she is not remanded in
detention,
If the accused, being default in making
appearance within the time-limit in pursuance of
the warrant for arrest issued pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 58, has been arrested and
produced accordingly, and fails to show any
satisfactory reason for being unable to appear in
the court,
If the accused was convicted of an offence and
sentenced to imprisonment within the period of
three years immediately before this instant charge
against him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), the court may, in relation to an offence other than that
punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding ten
years, remand on bail/bond or guarantee any accused who is a child
or infirm due to physical or mental disease or woman with pregnancy
of more than seven months or the aged above seventy-five years of
Bail /bond, guarantee or bank guarantee to be taken from the
accused: (1) Except in the case referred to in Section 67, the court
may ask for a bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee from the
accused if there exists a reasonable ground for proving the charge
against the accused.
Provided that the bank guarantee shall be unconditional and
renewable at such times as may be specified by the court.
The court shall remand in detention any accused who
fails to furnish bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee pursuant to
sub-section (1).
To remand on recognizance: The case shall be tried by remanding
the accused on recognizance to appear on appointed days when the
accused appears in the court, in any case other than that referred to in
Sections 67 and 68.
Additional bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee may be
demanded: (1) If it appears subsequently that the bail/bond,
guarantee or bank guarantee taken from any accused is insufficient,
the court may demand additional bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee from the accused.
If the accused fails to furnish such additional bail/bond,
guarantee or bank guarantee referred to in sub-section (1), the court
may remand such accused in detention.
Power to remand in detention or on guarantee at any stage of
proceedings: (1) In the course of examining evidence, the court
may, irrespective of the stage of the proceedings of a case, and in the
light of the circumstances of the case, remand the accused in
detention pursuant to Section 67 or demand a bail/bond, guarantee or
bank guarantee from the accused pursuant to Section 68; and nothing
shall be deemed to prevent the court from remanding the accused in
detention or demanding a bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee
from the accused subsequently by the reason only that the accused
was not remanded in detention or that a bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee was not taken from him or her earlier.
If the court has any reasonable ground to prove that the
accused remanded in detention pursuant to Section 67 or 68 is not
guilty of the offence, the court may, irrespective of the stage of
proceedings of the case, hear such matter and order the release of
such accused from detention.
Grounds for fixation of amount of bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee: (1) The amount of a bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee to be taken pursuant to this Chapter shall be fixed
reasonably, having regard to the following matters:
Nature and gravity of the offence,
Financial status and family condition of the
accused or the offender,
Age and physical condition of the accused or the
offender,
Whether he or she was previously convicted of
any offence and sentenced for the same or not,
Whether he or she has committed several
offences on the same occasion or not,
Sentence imposed or imposable on him or her,
and compensation to be borne by him or her,
Consequences resulted from the offence,
Whether he or she has pleaded guilty of the
offence or not,
Where the accused is a helpless or infirm person
or pregnant woman or woman accompanying a
baby whom she breast feeds.
If any party to a case makes a petition to the appeal
hearing court showing the reason that the amount of a bail/bond,
guarantee or bank guarantee demanded from any person under this
Act is lesser or excessive and is not thus reasonable, such court may
hear the matter and order the alteration or modification in the amount
of such bail/bond, guarantee or bank guarantee.
Petition may be made to appeal hearing court: A person who is
not satisfied with the order of detention, bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee made pursuant to this Chapter may make a petition to the
court hearing appeal up to one level.
Provided that in relation to a question as to the illegality of the
order of detention made in a case involving an offence punishable by
a sentence of imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of
five years or more, a petition may also be made to the court hearing
appeal more than one level.
Deed to be executed while taking bail/bond, guarantee or bank
guarantee: (1) While taking a bail/bond from any person under this
Chapter, the court shall cause a deed to be executed by such person
in the form referred to in Schedule-29, containing the condition that
the amount of bail/bond shall be forfeited if such person fails to
appear at the time and place specified by the court.
While taking a guarantee or bank guarantee pursuant to
this Act, the court shall fix the amount of guarantee and take security
of property equal to such amount.
If a person required to furnish a guarantee furnishes the
security of his or her property, the court shall cause a deed to be
executed by such person in the form referred to in Schedule-30
containing the condition that the amount of guarantee shall be
recovered from the property so furnished as security or from any
other property belonging to him or her if he or she fails to appear at
such time and place as specified by the court.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"guarantee" also includes a bank guarantee.
If any other person furnishes his or her property as a
guarantee for the person who is required to furnish guarantee
pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall cause a separate deed to be
executed by that person in the form referred to in Schedule-31
containing the condition that if that person fails to make the accused
appear at such place and time as specified by the court, the amount
of that guarantee shall be recovered from the property so furnished as
guarantee or from any other property belonging to that person.
If the value of the property furnished as guarantee
pursuant to this Section decreases subsequently for any reason, the
person who has furnished such guarantee shall submit a property
equal to the decreased value to the court.
Forfeiture of bail/bond: (1) If a person who has furnished a
bail/bond pursuant to this Chapter fails to appear in the court, the
bail/bond furnished by him or her shall be forfeited.
If any immovable property has been furnished as a
bail/bond pursuant to sub-section (1), the property equal to the
amount to be paid by such person shall be sold or recovered and the
rest property shall be returned to him or her.
Amount of bail/bond may be returned and guarantee released:
(1) If the court remands the accused in detention pursuant to this
Chapter in a case filed in the court, the bail/bond or guarantee
furnished by him or her before detention shall be released.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the bail/bond
or guarantee taken by the court from any accused in the course of the
proceedings of the case shall be immediately returned or released to
the accused if the accused is ultimately adjudged to be acquitted of
the offence.
To release from detention where case not adjudged within
specified period: (1) If the case cannot be adjudicated within one
year from the first date fixed for the examination of evidence in
relation to any accused remanded in detention for trial pursuant to
this Chapter and if such accused is still held in detention, the case
may be proceeded and adjudicated by remanding such accused on
bail/bond or guarantee.
Provided that:
This Section shall not apply to any person who is
accused of an offence punishable by a sentence of
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term
of ten years or more if such person is held in
detention pursuant to Section 67.
The court may, if it thinks reasonable, proceed
the case by remanding a recidivist in detention.
(2) If any court issues order to release any accused pursuant to
sub-section (1), it shall give information thereof to the appeal hearing
court not later than three days after the issue of such release order.
Maximum allowable period of detention: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no accused shall be
held in detention for a period exceeding the maximum term of the
sentence of imprisonment than can be imposed on him or her if the
charge made against him or her is proved.
Memorandum of order to be executed: While remanding any
accused in detention, releasing any accused held in detention or
taking a bail/bond or guarantee from any accused or modifying or
altering such bail/bond or guarantee pursuant to this Chapter or
releasing from detention pursuant to Section 77, the court shall
execute a memorandum of order to that effect, accompanied by the
reason for the same.
Warrant for detention to be given: While holding any person in
detention for any reason whatsoever pursuant to this Act, the
competent authority shall hold such person in detention by giving a
warrant for detention in the form referred to in Schedule-32,
accompanied by the reason therefor and legal ground of such
detention, to that person pursuant to an order for detention made
pursuant to this Chapter.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Appointed Date
Appointment of date for appearance by assigning reason: (1) A
court shall, in so doing, appoint the date for appearance upon
specifying each proceeding required to be conducted in the presence
of parties to a case and the proceeding to be carried out on each
appointed date for appearance.
The proceeding specified pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall be carried out on the appointed date.
Provided that if the specified proceeding cannot be conducted
for any reason on the appointed date for appearance, the court may
execute a memorandum of order, assigning the reason therefor, and
appoint another date for appearance.
In a case to which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff
or defendant, the court shall give the concerned government attorney
office a notice of such date for hearing or proceeding of the case as
appointed pursuant to sub-section (1).
Book of, and receipt of acknowledgment of, appointed date for
appearance: (1) The court shall maintain one book of appointed
date for appearance or a separate book for each case division, as
required, in the form referred to in Schedule-33.
The concerned employee shall mention in the book of
appointed date for appearance maintained pursuant to sub-section (1)
the date appointed for appearance and the purpose for which that
date is so appointed and signed it, cause the parties to the case who
are present to affix signature or thumb impression on it, and maintain
a receipt of acknowledgement of the date for appearance in the form
referred to in Schedule-34, to be recorded in the case-file.
If any party does not appear in the court on the date
appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
employee shall record that matter in the book of appointed date for
appearance, and sign it.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Government of Nepal shall not be required to be on
recognizance in a case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff.
Sheet of appointed date for appearance: (1) The court shall give a
sheet of appointed date for appearance to the parties to each case in
the form referred to in Schedule-35.
(2) The concerned employee shall state the date appointed for
appearance and the purpose for which that date is so appointed in the
sheet referred to in sub-section (1), and sign it.
Appointment of date for appearance to be made in a manner to
be convenient to parties: (1) While appointing a date for
appearance for any purpose in a case, the court shall appoint such
date, as far as practicable, taking into consideration of whether it
would be convenient to the parties to the case and the specified
purpose could be accomplished or not.
While appointing a date for appearance pursuant to subsection (1), it shall be appointed in accordance with the schedule of
business specified in relation to the proceedings of the case.
To appear on appointed date for appearance: (1) Where a date is
appointed by the court for appearance for any proceeding, the
accused or defendant shall appear in the court on that appointed date
for appearance.
Provided that if any party to a case makes a petition showing
the reason for being unable to appear in the court on the appointed
date for appearance, and the court holds such reason to be
reasonable, the court may order the extension of the expired
appointed date for appearance for a maximum period of fifteen days,
at one time or several times not exceeding two times, excluding the
time required for journey.
Where a person required to appear in the court on the
appointed date for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) has been
held in detention or imprisoned in any manner whatsoever, the
person shall send information of that matter to the concerned court
through the prison in which he or she is so held in detention or
imprisoned.
If information is given pursuant to sub-section (2), such
person shall not be deemed to have expired the appointed date for
appearance during the period of such detention or imprisonment.
If any person who is held in detention or imprisoned
gives information thereof to the court pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court may order the concerned prison to produce that person at the
time of trial.
Consequences of absence of parties on appointed date for
appearance: (1) If the plaintiff does not appear on the date
appointed for trial and proceeding in any case related to an offence
under Schedule-4, the court shall appoint another date for appearance
in estimation of the time-limit that can be extended by him or her
pursuant to the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 85.
If the party to a case appears on or before the other date
as appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) and makes a
petition subject to the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 59,
showing a reasonable reason for being unable to appear on the
previous appointed date owing to a force majeure event, the court
shall extend the appointed date for appearance of him or her and
adjudicate the case in accordance with law.
If the party to a case does not appear in the court on the
other date appointed for appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) and it
appears or is held from the evidence contained in the case-file that
the defendant has admitted the plaintiff's claims in whole or in part,
the court shall adjudicate the case by making judgment to such
extent, and dismissing it to the extent that the claims which do not
appear or are not held to be admitted by the defendant.
Provided that where the plaintiff is in attendance but the
defendant is absent, the court shall adjudge the case accordingly, by
examining all proofs and evidence adduced by the plaintiff and the
defendant.
Even though the accused or defendant does not appear
in the court subsequent to a deposition or statement of defense made
in the court pursuant to this Act, the court may proceed and
adjudicate the case in accordance with law.
Power to issue warrant for arrest and attach property: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 86, if any accused
has failed to appear on the previous appointed date for appearance,
the court may, if it is of the opinion that the accused should be
arrested and produced before it, issue a warrant for his or her arrest
pursuant to Section 58 and order the arrest of, and attachment of the
property of, such accused.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned police employee shall arrest the accused, and the
concerned Land Revenue Office or other body or organization shall
attach the property of the accused, in pursuance of such order.
Remaining on recognizance after examination of evidence not
necessary: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any party does not wish to remain on recognizance after
the examination of evidence, the party may make a petition to the
court for a leave to that effect.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
court does not consider necessary to keep him or her on
recognizance, it may discontinue his or her recognizance.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Attorney
Attorney may be appointed: (1) If any party to a case is unable to
appear in person to file a complaint, memorandum of appeal or
statement of defense, submit evidence, recover the claimed amount,
compensation or any other thing in pursuance of judgment or do any
other necessary act pertaining to the case, that party may appoint an
attorney on his or her behalf, setting out the reason for the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no attorney may be appointed in the following circumstance:
If the case relates to any offence under Schedule1 or Schedule-2,
If the accused who is required to make deposition
pursuant to this Act has to appear personally in
the court to make such deposition,
If the accused is required to be on remand
pursuant to this Act or is a person who is
remanded in detention as a consequence of his or
her failure to furnish such bail/bond or guarantee
as demanded to be furnished by him or her,
If the court so thinks necessary on any reasonable
ground and orders the party to a case to appear
personally in the court despite the circumstance
that an attorney is already or may be appointed,
Except where a person who is a foreign national
or whose nationality is not known is in detention
or has already furnished a bail/bond or guarantee,
if such person fails to furnish a bail/bond or
guarantee of an amount equivalent to the sentence
which can be imposed on him or her upon
judgment in the case in accordance with law,
If there is any penalty, fine, ten percent fee, five
percent fee imposed pursuant to a court order is
due and payable, upon the party being default in
payment of the same,
If the court, showing any reasonable reason to do
so, has passed an order disallowing the party to
appoint an attorney.
If any person appoints an attorney in contravention of
sub-section (2), the court shall void such attorney.
Any person having the following qualification may be
appointed as an attorney:
Being competent to make contract under the law
in force,
Not having been sentenced for forgery, fraud,
corruption or
other criminal offence
involving moral turpitude,
Provided that nothing contained in this
clause shall prevent any party to a case from
appointing any of his or her joint family relatives
as his or her attorney.
No government claimed amount pursuant to any
decision or fee, court fee, penalty or fine payable
to the court in the execution of judgment being
due and payable.
In appointing an attorney pursuant to sub-section (1), a
power of attorney shall be executed in the form referred to in
Schedule-36, stating the following matters:
Subject matter of the case,
Full name, surname, address including street, and
age of the person to be appointed as attorney, his
or her citizenship number and district of issue of
citizenship certificate,
Matter that the person to be appointed as attorney
does not suffer any disqualification referred to in
sub-section (4),
Matter that any penalty, fine, ten percent fee and
five percent fee imposed pursuant to a court order
is not due and payable,
The act authorized to be done by the attorney.
A power of attorney shall be witnessed by at least two
persons.
A power of attorney shall bear signature or thumb
impression of the party appointing the attorney and the witnesses.
Person may become attorney of more than one person
simultaneously: A person may become an attorney of more than one
person simultaneously.
Provided that a person who is an attorney of a party to a case
shall not also become an attorney of the opposite party to the same
case or a case related to that case.
Party may be attorney: In any case involving more than one
plaintiff or defendant, any one of them may be appointed as an
attorney.
Provided that an attorney of one party to a case shall not also
become attorney of the opposite party to the same case.
Powers and duties of attorney: (1) An attorney may carry out any
acts set forth in the power of attorney on behalf of the party
appointing him or her.
If the court makes order to cause the appearance of the
person appointing attorney in person, the attorney shall cause such
person to make appearance in the court.
If the concerned person fails to appear pursuant to subsection (2), the court may void the attorney of such person.
Revocation of attorney: (1) If a party who has appointed an attorney
wishes to revoke the power of attorney executed by him or her, the
party may, at any time, revoke the power of attorney and carry out
acts pertaining to the case in person or appoint another person as his
or her attorney.
In the event of the revocation of the power of attorney
and carrying out of acts pertaining to the case by a party in person,
the concerned party shall give information thereof through petition to
the court.
Not to arrest attorney: No attorney shall be arrested for any
sentence imposed on, or liability to be borne by, the party upon
passing judgment in the case.
Special provision relating to permission to appoint attorney: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of sub-section (2)
of Section 89, a person in the following circumstance may make a
petition, setting out the matter, to the court for permission to appoint
an attorney:
If a person accused of an offence punishable by a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
years or less is not held in detention and there
arises a circumstance where he or she cannot
appear on the appointed date for appearance
because of a force majeure event,
If a woman accused of an offence punishable by a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years cannot appear in the court
on the appointed date for appearance because of
her delivery or any other reason.
If, upon a petition made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court considers its contents to be reasonable, it may, assigning the
reasons to be recorded, grant permission to him or her to appoint an
attorney, with or without specifying the period, subject to the other
provisions contained in this Chapter.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Transfer and Adjournment of Cases
Power to transfer cases: (1) The Supreme Court may, if there exists
a circumstance referred to in clause (1) of Article 134 of the
Constitution of Nepal, procure a case sub-judice in any High Court
from such Court, and proceed, hear and adjudicate it.
The Supreme Court may, if there exists a circumstance
referred to in clause (2) of Article 134 of the Constitution of Nepal,
make an order that a case sub-judice in one High Court be
transferred to, and heard and adjudicated by, another High Court.
The High Court may, if there exists a circumstance
referred to in clause (2) of Article 145 of the Constitution of Nepal,
make an order that a case sub-judice in one District Court under its
jurisdiction be transferred to, and heard and adjudicated by, another
District Court under its jurisdiction.
Decision as to whether the circumstance requiring the
transfer of the case referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) exists or not
shall be made on the basis of a petition by the concerned party to a
case or information from the inspection or report of the court.
If there is some reason that any case filed in any court
cannot be heard by the judge of that court pursuant to this Act, the
concerned court shall submit a report, setting out such matter, to the
appeal hearing court, and upon receipt of such report, the appeal
hearing court may, also considering the convenience of the parties,
transfer such case to another court of equal jurisdiction that is
subordinate to its territorial jurisdiction.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), such
court shall, in accordance with the order of the Supreme Court,
proceed, hear and adjudicate the case.
Even if any case is adjudicated by another court
pursuant to sub-section (2), (3) or (5), appeal from the judgment
made by such court shall lie in the court hearing appeal from the
court where the plaint has been registered originally.
Power to adjourn cases: (1) If any party to a case, out of the several
cases filed in the several courts, makes a petition to the concerned
court, showing a reasonable reason that the adjudication of one case
cannot be, or ought not to be, made until any other case is
adjudicated, or that judgment of one case will have substantial effect
on the judgment of any other case or if it realizes that matter, on its
own initiative, in the course of proceedings, the court may, for the
reasons to be recorded, order that such case be adjourned.
If any court passes an order to adjourn any case filed in
it pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall adjourn all the
proceedings of the case, by giving written information thereof to the
parties to the case, and also give information thereof to the
concerned court in which another case is filed.
Upon receipt of the information referred to in subsection (2), the concerned court shall, upon adjudicating the related
case filed in it, give information thereof, accompanied by a copy of
the judgment, to the court adjourning the case within thirty days after
the date of judgment, and upon receipt of such information, the court
adjourning the case shall resume the proceedings of the case by
giving a written notice thereof to the parties to the case and
appointing the date for appearance, and hear and adjudicate the case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if such parties are also parties to the case referred to in sub-section
(3), the court adjudging the case shall order them to appear in the
court adjourning the case not later than fifteen days.
If two courts hold divergent views on which of the cases
filed in such courts should be adjourned, the courts shall send their
respective report to the appeal hearing court.
In the circumstance referred to in sub-section (5), even a
party to the case may make petition to the concerned appeal hearing
court.
If a report has been sent pursuant to sub-section (5) or a
petition is made by the party pursuant to sub-section (6), the court
shall act in accordance with the order of the appeal hearing court, in
relation to such case.
If the court hearing appeal from the two courts holding
divergent views referred to in sub-section (5) is not the same, such
matter shall be submitted to the Supreme Court, and it shall be done
as per the order of the Supreme Court.
If the court so deems necessary, it may give notice to
and hear the concerned parties before adjourning the case or passing
an order for adjournment pursuant to this Section.
To adjourn case in the event of failure of accused to appear: (1)
If an accused against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued
pursuant to Section 57 does not appear or cannot be caused to appear
before the court even within thirty-five days after the date of the
issuance of the warrant for arrest to the accused, the court shall
adjourn the case in the case of that accused and hear and adjudicate
the case, upon taking and examining evidence, in the case of the
other accused involved in that case.
Provided that:
In the case of an accused who does not appear
subsequent to a deposition made in or statement
of defense submitted to the court, the case shall
not be liable to adjournment, and the court shall
adjudicate the case upon taking and examining
the proof and evidence adduced by the plaintiff
and the defendant and such other evidence as the
court thinks reasonable,
In relation to a case of offence punishable by a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
years or less, judgment shall be made in that case
based on the appreciation of evidence, also in the
case of the accused or defendants failing to
appear in the court.
If any case is to be adjourned pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall postpone all the proceedings of the case.
If a case is adjourned pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
accused appears or is caused to appear in the court prior to the
adjudication of the case, the court shall revive the proceeding, give
information thereof to the complainant and proceed and adjudicate
the case.
If an accused does not appear or is not caused to appear
in the court within a period of three years after the date of
adjournment of the case pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
revive the case so adjourned and proceed and adjudicate it in the case
of such accused.
If an accused does not appear or is not caused to appear
in the court even until the period during which the case can be
subject to adjournment pursuant to sub-section (1), the proceeds
acquired from the auction sale, under the law in force, of the
property attached pursuant to sub-section (15) of Section 58 shall,
upon the judgment in that case convicting the accused, be credited to
the consolidated fund of the Government of Nepal.
Where an accused appears or is caused to appear in the
court prior to the adjudication of the case and the accused produces
any evidence to the satisfaction of the court that the accused could
not appear by the reason that he or she was ignorant of the case
instituted against him or her, the court shall order that the property
attached be returned to him or her by deducting or realizing the
following expenses:
The expenses incurred in attaching the property
where it has not yet been sold,
The expenses incurred in publishing a public
notice for his or her appearance in the court or in
the case of him or her in any matter related to the
proceedings of the case.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a case filed in a court is adjourned and a report or
information is received that the accused has appeared as a plaintiff or
defendant in any other case filed in the same court or in any other
court, such case shall not be deemed to be adjourned, and the court
may order such accused to appear in the court to proceed such case.
Such case may be revived, proceeded and adjudicated,
in spite of the failure of the accused to appear in pursuance of the
order referred to in sub-section (7).

Chapter-11
Provisions Relating to Examination of Evidence
Evidence to be produced: (1) All of his or her witnesses,
documents, exhibits and evidences shall be specified in the
complaint by the plaintiff, in the deposition by the accused, and in
the statement of defense by the defendant.
Such documents, exhibits and evidences specified
pursuant to sub-section (1) as, by the nature of such documents,
exhibits or evidences, should be in his or her possession or
obtainable by him or her shall be produced by the plaintiff with the
complaint, by the defendant with the statement of defense and by the
accused while making deposition.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), the following provisions shall apply to the following matters:
If the accused, in making deposition, or the
defendant, in submitting the statement of defense,
makes a request that another date for appearance
be appointed for producing any document, exhibit
or evidence that cannot be produced immediately,
the court may appoint another date for appearance
up to a period of one month,
In the case of taking and examining evidence
related to the offence of forgery or fraud pursuant
to sub-section (3) of the Section 104, the
provisions of that Section shall apply,
If, during the trial of the case, there arises a
circumstance requiring the production of any
additional evidence in support or rebuttal of any
new fact, the concerned party may produce such
additional evidence with the permission of the
court.
Any party to the case shall, in producing any
documentary evidence pursuant to sub-section (2), submit such
number of copies of the document as is more by one copy than the
number of opponents.
Provided that it shall not be required to submit copies of such
document in any case under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“copy” means a photocopy or any other copy of a document.
100. Originals to be returned: (1) If any document is produced before
the court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 99, the court shall
cause its employee to verify whether the copy, submitted pursuant to
sub-section (4) of the said Section, corresponds to the original or not.
The employee making verification pursuant to subsection (1) shall, upon verification, sign each page of the document
setting down therein that the copy is true according to the original,
get the party submitting the document to sign the same and
authenticate it with the seal of the court.
After the authentication made pursuant to sub-section
(2), such employee shall affix the seal of the court on, sign and date,
the reverse side of the original, and thereupon return it to the party
submitting it.
If the court so wishes, it may, as required, order the
concerned party to re-submit the original of a document returned
pursuant to sub-section (3).
101. Party to cause attendance of witness: (1) The concerned party shall
cause the attendance of any witness of each case filed in the court on
the day appointed by the court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if, in any specific case in which the defendants are in attendance at
the time when the case is filed, the plaintiff or the defendant or both
may produce their respective evidence of witness before the court at
the time of filing of the case.
In producing a witness pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the concerned investigating authority or his or her office shall
produce the witness of prosecution in any case under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2, through the government attorney office.
The evidence of a witness who fails to appear on the
date appointed for appearance for the examination of witness
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be taken into the case.
Provided that if the witness fails to appear owing to a force
majeure event and the party makes a petition setting out the matter,
the court may appoint another date for appearance for the
examination of such witness.
If the process of examination of witness has not begun
by the reason that all defendants to any case set forth in Schedule-1
or Schedule-2 of this Act are not present, any party may, showing
that the production of witnesses cannot be enforced subsequently if
they are not produced immediately, request that such witnesses be
produced immediately and their depositions recorded.
If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (5) and such
reason is reasonable, the court may, assigning the reasons for the
same, take deposition of such witness immediately.
The party and opposite party to a case in attendance
shall be allowed to make cross-examination of the deposition made
by the witness pursuant to sub-section (6), and if there does not exist
such situation, the party in attendance subsequently may make
rebuttal subsequently only to the extent of the contents of the
deposition.
102. Examination of expert witness: If an expert who expresses an
expert opinion in any case related to a heinous or grievous offence in
which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff dies or has resided
abroad for a long time and is not able to return to Nepal or it is not
possible to examine him or her for any other reason, expert opinion
may be obtained from another expert in the same field who is equal
to or superior to such expert witness.
103. Cross examination of the co-accused: If, in examining evidence
pursuant to this Chapter, any co-accused makes accusation against
another co-accused, such co-accused may make cross-examination to
the extent of such accusation.
104. Provisions relating to documentary evidence: (1) The court shall
cause the parties to a case to produce the originals of documentary
evidence on the date appointed for appearance for examining
evidence and show the document produced by one party to the other.
If the other party makes a plea that the document shown
pursuant to sub-section (1) was made by means of forgery or fraud,
the court shall set down such plea and record the deposition of such
party.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if, in the process of showing any documentary evidence produced by
one party to the other party, the other party, mentioning that he or
she is not able to confirm immediately whether such document is
genuine, forged or fraud, makes request for time for that purpose, the
court may, as required, appoint a date for not more than seven days,
and shall give information thereof to the other party, and record the
deposition of that party on that appointed date and also examine the
evidence produced by that party in that connection if that party states
that the document is forged or fraud.
Provided that in the case of a party who is absent or not
represented on the date appointed for appearance for the examination
of evidence, it shall not be necessary to show the document to, or
record the deposition of, that party pursuant to this Section.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if any party, due to a force majeure event, remains absent on the date
appointed for appearance for confirming whether a document is
genuine or forged, and if the party or his or her representative
appears within fifteen days of the appointment of such date and
wishes to express any matter about that document, such party or
representative shall be given an opportunity to make expression
accordingly.
105. Document named as forged or fraud to be kept in the case-file:
In the process of showing the original of a document produced by
one party to the other party pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section
104, if the other party names it as a forged or fraudulent document,
the reverse side of such original shall be signed by both the parties,
by the concerned employee and bear the seal of the court and
thereupon be sealed and recorded in the case-file safely and if there
is no space to affix signature or thumb impression, separate paper
shall be added to the deed with signature or thumb impression at the
joints.
106. Witness to be examined on fixed day: (1) The deposition of all
witnesses in attendance on the date appointed for appearance for the
examination of witness shall be taken; and only where it is not
possible because of the time factor to complete the taking of the
deposition of all witnesses in attendance on that day, the deposition
of such witnesses shall be taken on the next day on which the court
remains open.
Prior to making a deposition by a witness who appears
to make such deposition pursuant to sub-section (1), the witness shall
take an oath that he or she will state noting but the truth, in the form
referred to in Schedule-37 in a manner to be heard by others, and
such oath shall be recorded in the concerned case-file.
The deposition of a witness taken down shall be
recorded in the form referred to in Schedule-38.
107. Power to examine witness on commission: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a witness is in a
place outside the jurisdiction of the court in which the case is filed or
the attendance of such witness cannot be procured for any reason
and, in view of the gravity of the case, it so appears necessary to
examine such witness on commission, the court shall give
information thereof to the parties to the case.
If any party to the case so desires, the party may make a
petition, accompanied by the reasons, to the court that any
interrogatories which the party wishes to be asked to the witness be
included in the commission referred to in sub-section (1).
If any petition is made pursuant to sub-section (2) and
the court deems reasonable to have such interrogatories included in a
commission, it may order that such interrogatories be also included
in the commission; and the interrogatories of the commission shall
be framed accordingly.
The form of a commission shall be as set forth in
Schedule-39.
If, in examining a witness on commission pursuant to
sub-section (1), any party to the case so desires, the party may appear
in the court to which the commission is directed and examine, crossexamine or re-examine the said witness in accordance with the
prevailing law on evidence.
108. Deposition to be taken before bench: (1) The deposition of a
witness to be taken pursuant to this Act shall be taken before the
bench of the judge.
Provided that while taking the deposition of a witness who is
unable to appear before the court due to physical infirmity, the judge
himself or herself may proceed to or send an officer employee
subordinate to him or her to the place where such witness is residing
or staying, and the evidence of such witness shall be taken by the
judge or by such employee in the form of deposition.
While so taking the deposition of a witness pursuant to
sub-section (1), the concerned parties to the case shall be given
information thereof and also provided with an opportunity to make
examination pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 107.
109. Witness may be examined through video conference: (1) If it is
not possible to produce before the court a witness required to be
examined pursuant to this Chapter because of the witness being
physically infirm or a child or for security reason, the concerned
party may, setting out that matter, make a petition to the court for the
examination of such witness through video conference.
If the court makes an order for the examination of any
specific witness through video conference, the witness shall be
examined accordingly.
If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is made and
the reason set forth therein seems to be reasonable or the court makes
an order pursuant to sub-section (2), the court may, notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, examine such witness
through video conference.
In making video conference pursuant to sub-section (3),
the concerned party to the case may, with the permission of the
court, appear before such conference room and examine, crossexamine or re-examine the witness.
In examining a witness pursuant to sub-section (3),
arrangement shall be made to record the matters expressed by such
witness, and the court shall maintain records of the video conference.
The record of examination of a witness through video
conference shall be maintained in the form referred to in Schedule40.
110. Demeanor, appearance etc. of witness may be recorded: (1) The
judge may record such remarks as he or she perceives material
respecting the demeanor of a witness whilst under examination, and
such remarks may include how was the behavior and appearance of
the witness, whether the witness was excited or disappointed while
answering the questions put to him or her and what the reflection
was as to the truth or untruth of the replies made by him or her from
his or her facial expression.
The note made pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
signed by the judge and kept in the case-file.
The judge may take into consideration of the note
referred to in sub-section (1) while making appraisal of the
deposition of the witness as evidence.
111. Witness once examined not to be re-examined: A witness who has
once been examined shall not be examined again.
Provided that if any matter that is essential to be inquired into
with such witness has been omitted and the judge, assigning the
reasons thereof, make an order to that effect, such witness may be
summoned and examined again.
112. Summons or warrant for arrest may be issued to witness ought
to be examined: (1) A party to the case may make a petition,
accompanied by the reasons for the same, that a summons be issued
to enforce the attendance of any witness who is related with criminal
case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff but who does not
appear on the day appointed by the court for appearance for the
examination of evidence and the examination of such witness is
expedient in view of the gravity of the offence or the production of
any document or exhibit by such witness.
If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is made and
the court considers such petition to be reasonable and perceives that
the examination of such evidence is necessary, the court may
summon such witness to appear before the court within a maximum
period of fifteen days and examine him or her.
If a summons is issued pursuant to sub-section (2), such
witness shall appear within the specified time-limit, except for a
reasonable reason.
If a witness fails to appear within the time-limit
specified pursuant to sub-section (3), the court may impose a fine not
exceeding two thousand rupees on such witness, issue a warrant for
arrest and take deposition of such witness when he or she is so
arrested and brought before it.
If any witness is not found or cannot be arrested even
upon the issuance of a warrant for arrest pursuant to sub-section (4),
the court shall pass judgment in the case, awarding a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding forty-five days, based on the
evidence examined, subject to the enforcement of the sentence as and
when such witness is arrested or found.
A summons or warrant for arrest issued pursuant to this
Section shall be served pursuant to Chapter-6.
113. Daily and travel allowance and security to be provided to
witness: (1) The concerned police office shall provide witnesses,
who appear before the court, on behalf of the Government of Nepal,
in any case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,
with such daily and travel allowance as is receivable by the nongazetted first class government employee, and expert witnesses with
such daily and travel allowance as is receivable by the gazetted third
class government employee under the law in force.
If any government employee appears before the court as
a witness or expert, the office where the employee is serving shall
provide him or her with the daily and travel allowance receivable by
such employee under the law in force.
The Government of Nepal shall make necessary
arrangement for the security of a witness referred to in sub-section
114. To protect witness or victim: (1) If any person who is a witness in
any case related to any offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2
thinks that there is a threat to his or her security while appearing
before the court or after making deposition in the court, he or she
may make a petition, setting out the reason for the same, to the court
for making security arrangement.
If a request referred to in sub-section (1) is made, the
court may order the concerned body to make arrangement for the
security of such witness.
If an order is made by the court pursuant to sub-section
(2), it shall be the duty of such body to make arrangement for such
security.
No question shall be raised in any court about any
measure followed pursuant to the order made by the court for the
protection of witness pursuant to this Section.
The police shall provide security to the victim of any
particular offence or witness of any case if information is obtained
that such person is under undue coercion, threat or having adverse
impact on the security of his or her body from the opponent as being
the witness thereof.
115. Witness or evidence may be examined even outside the State of
Nepal: (1) If any court needs to examine any witness or evidence
that is outside the State of Nepal or issue a commission to that effect
in relation to any case pending before it, the examination of such
witness or evidence or the issuance of such commission may be
effected in accordance with the law in force on mutual legal
assistance.
The form of commission to be used pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as set forth in Schedule-41.
The witness or evidence examined pursuant to subsection (1) shall be deemed to have been examined in accordance
with this Act.
Provided that details of the witness or evidence so examined
shall be certified in accordance with the law of the concerned
country.
If the examination of a witness or evidence required to
be examined or has been examined pursuant to this Section in a
language other than the Nepali language, an authentic translation of
the record of such examination or evidence into the Nepali language
shall be submitted to the court.
If it is necessary to examine any witness from outside
the State of Nepal or make his or her deposition in the course of
investigation or trial of any case, such deposition may be conducted
by means of video conference or other similar technology as
prescribed for that purpose.
Arrangement shall be made for keeping records of the
deposition made by the witness in the course of witness testimony or
deposition conducted in accordance with sub-section (5).
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, nothing shall be deemed to prevent the trying and settling of
a case by the reason only that evidence cannot be examined pursuant
to this Section.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Withdrawal, Compromise and Mediation of
Cases
116. Not to withdraw cases: (1) No case once filed in the court on any
offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule2 shall be capable of being
withdrawn.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
any case other than any of the following cases may be withdrawn:
A case relating to the offence of forged passport
or citizenship, immigration, corruption, human
trafficking and transportation, smuggling and
transaction of narcotic drugs, poaching of, and
illicit trade in, wildlife, adulteration of goods of
public consumption with poison, murder by
administrating poison, in a cruel or inhumane
way or by taking control, money laundering, or
ancient monuments protection,
A case related to the offence under Section 56 of

Chapter-2, Section 129, 130, 131 or 134 of

Chapter-6, Section 138, 139 or 141 of Chapter-7,

Chapter-8, Section 167 of Chapter-10, Section
206 of Chapter-16, Chapter-17, sub-section (1),
(2) or (3) of Section 219 of Chapter-18, Section
230 or 231 of Chapter-19, or Section 256 of

Chapter-22 of Part-2 of the Penal Code,
If the withdrawal of a case is prejudicial to the
property right of any person, the case in which
consent of such person is not available to that
extent.
The Government of Nepal shall make directives with
necessary standards on the cases to be withdrawn pursuant to subsection (2).
If a case to be withdrawn pursuant to sub-section (2),
the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Attorney
General, make decision to its withdrawal, in accordance with the
directives made pursuant to sub-section (3).
If the Government of Nepal decides to withdraw a case
pursuant to sub-section (4), the Government of Nepal shall, through
the Attorney General or such government attorney as authorized by
him or her, make a petition, accompanied by the reasons for such
withdrawal, to the concerned court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (5), the
court shall conduct hearing before granting permission for the
withdrawal of the case.
If, upon conducting hearing pursuant to sub-section (6),
the court deems it reasonable to make order allowing the withdrawal
of the case, the court may make such order allowing such
withdrawal, assigning the reasons for the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no case which is under consideration at the stage of appeal,
reference, review or revision shall be subject to withdrawal.
117. Compromise may be made: Any case related to any of the offences
under Schedule-3 and Schedule-4 may be compromised at any stage
whatsoever with the consent of the parties to the case.
Provided that if, in a case related to cheating or loss of or
damage to any property of the public or foreign employment, both
the defendant and the victim make a petition to the Government of
Nepal for the execution of compromise, the Government of Nepal
may, if it deems it reasonable, make an order to have such
compromise executed through the government attorney in respect of
such case.
118. Procedures for making compromise: (1) The parties shall, if they
desire to compromise a case pursuant to Section 117, submit to the
court a joint petition, bearing signature or thumb impression of both
the parties, setting out the terms of compromise intended to be made
within the limits of the plaintiff's claim.
If a petition containing the terms of compromise is
submitted to the court pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
read out the petition to the parties and ask the parties making such
petition whether they intend to enter into compromise with free will
and consent or not.
If, in response to a question asked pursuant to subsection (2), the parties reply that they are willing to compromise with
free will and consent, the judge trying the case shall prepare a deed
of compromise subject to the terms contained in the joint petition,
and take signature or thumb impression of the parties and affix his or
her signature on the deed.
Except in cases where any one has been authorized by a
power of attorney to enter into compromise pursuant to this Chapter,
while entering into compromise through an attorney, a separate deed
of consent executed by the party to that effect shall be submitted.
119. Consequences of withdrawal or compromise of cases: (1) If the
Government of Nepal withdraws any case pursuant to Section 116,
no case shall be instituted again against the accused of that case in
respect of the same offence.
If the compromise of a case is made pursuant to Section
117, no action or case shall be capable of being instituted
subsequently between the same parties in respect of the same matter.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall bar
the making of a petition claiming that any party has not complied
with the terms contained in the deed of compromise.
120. Mediation may be made: (1) If the parties to any case related with
any offence under Schedule-4 so agree or the court considers
appropriate to refer such case for mediation, the court may order to
refer such case for mediation at any time and stage, getting the
parties to choose the mediator and specifying the mediator if the
parties fail to do so.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
parties to the case shall appear before such mediator.
After the parties appear pursuant to sub-section (2), the
mediator shall conduct mediation proceedings, and prepare a deed of
compromise and submit it to the court if the parties consent to enter
into compromise.
Upon receipt of a deed of compromise referred to in
sub-section (3), the court shall authenticate such deed.
If compromise is executed pursuant to sub-section (4),
the court may, in pursuance of the deed of compromise executed by
the parties, exempt the penalty, fine or fee imposed by the lower
court in relation to such case.

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Proceedings, Hearing of, and Judgments in,
Cases
121. Charge to be read out to the accused: (1) When the accused
appears before the court, the particulars of the offence of which he or
she is accused, all facts related with such offence, the evidence
produced by the complainant in support of the charge and
punishment imposable on him or her if such charge is proved shall
be clearly stated to him or her, and the claim made in the charge
sheet shall be read out by the court to him or her.
While stating and reminding the charge and punishment
imposable on such charge pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
also state which charge is based on which proof, evidence or
document, and provide him or her with opportunity to see each
proof, evidence or document, or to obtain a copy thereof if he or she
so wishes.
122. Deposition of the accused to be made: (1) After reading out the
charge and punishment imposable on such charge to the accused
pursuant to Section 121, the court shall ask him or her whether he or
she has any statement to make on that charge and record his or her
deposition.
If any accused who has already appeared in the court
wishes to consult a law practitioner prior to taking of his or her
deposition, he or she shall be provided with an opportunity to make
such consultation.
Before recording the deposition pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall inform the accused that he or she shall not be
compelled to testify against himself or herself and reminded of the
matter that such testimony if made by him or her may be admissible
in evidence against him or her.
In the process of reminding the accused of the matters
pursuant to sub-section (3), the demand, if any, made by the
government attorney offering a reduction in sentence against him or
her and the relevant provision of the law in force shall also be stated
to him or her.
In recording the deposition of the accused pursuant to
this Section, each question and answer to such question shall both be
recorded, and where deposition has been taken through video
conference, such deposition shall also be recorded.
After recording the deposition referred to in sub-section
(5), signature or thumb impressions of the accused shall be taken on
such record and the judge also shall sign it.
Provided that where deposition has been made through video
conference, the judge shall authenticate such matter.
If, in taking deposition of the accused pursuant to this
Section, any matter is omitted to be inquired with him or her, the
court may summon the appearance of such accused and take redeposition of the omitted matter from him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in relation to a case related to any offence under Schedule-4,
a statement of defense shall be submitted in the form referred to in
Schedule-42, within the time-limit set forth in the process issued by
the court.
123. Judgment to be made immediately if the accused pleads guilty of
offence: (1) If any accused, pleading guilty of the offence which he
or she is charged with, makes a statement of confession before the
court, the court may, also having regard to the truth and reliability of
such statement, make judgment immediately.
Provided that:
In spite of such statement of confession by the
accused, if the court, in view of the evidence
contained in the case-file, circumstances under
which the offence was committed or any other
matter, has any reason to believe that his or her
confession is not true, the court shall not make
judgment in the case pursuant to this Section but
shall order the examination of further evidence in
the case, by executing a memorandum of order,
accompanied by the reasons therefor,
If the accused who has confessed the offence
which he or she is charged with makes a plea for
a reduction in the sentence, the court shall, stating
all matters pertaining thereto, take his or her
deposition and examine evidence thereon.
If, in deposing before the court, any accused makes a
plea that is different from the plea he or she has made before the
investigating authority and the plaintiff makes submission for
permission to re-conduct investigation into the evidence or plea
produced or made by him or her and submit further proof or
evidence to the court, the court may give permission to produce such
additional proof or evidence.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
shall not adjudge the case until such additional proof or evidence is
produced.
Provided that such additional proof or evidence shall be
produced prior to the order for taking and trying of evidence.
If any accused does not confess fully the offence which
he or she is charged with but confesses it partially, the court shall
order the examination of further evidence to the extent only of the
matter which he or she has not confessed.
124. Discussion may be held between plaintiff and defendant: (1) If
the accused has not pleaded guilty of the offence pursuant to Section
123, the court may order to hold discussion between the plaintiff and
the defendant in order to ascertain the matter to be adjudged in the
case.
If an order is made to hold discussion pursuant to subsection (1), the plaintiff, defendant and the accused, in respect of a
case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff, shall also appear
in the court, and if such accused so wishes, his or her law practitioner
may also appear.
In the discussion referred to in sub-section (1), the
plaintiff and the defendant may present claim and defense and
evidence relevant thereto, respectively.
The court may ascertain the matter to be adjudged in the
case from the claim, defense and evidence submitted by the plaintiff
and the defendant pursuant to sub-section (3).
125. Appointment of date for appearance for examination of
evidence: (1) The court shall, in any of the following circumstances,
execute a memorandum of order, setting out, inter alia, the matters to
be adjudged as ascertained pursuant to Section 124, and appoint the
date for appearance for the examination of evidence:
If the accused refuses to make deposition
pursuant to Section 122,
If the defendant does not submit a statement of
defense,
If the accused makes deposition or statement of
defense, denying wholly or partly the charge
made against him or her,
If the court executes a memorandum of order for
the examination of evidence pursuant to clause
(a) or (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of

Section 123,
Such other circumstance as may be held
appropriate by the court.
While appointing the date for appearance for the
examination of evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall
estimate the time required for the witnesses to appear and the
documentary evidence and thing to be produced, and so appoint such
date that evidence is collected as soon as possible.
If the plaintiff of a case makes a request for time for the
submission of further evidence or proof pursuant to sub-section (2)
of Section 123, the court shall, in appointing the date for appearance
pursuant to sub-section (1), generally appoint the date for appearance
for the examination of evidence so that evidence is examined not
later than two months after the filing of case.
In making order for appointing the date for appearance
for the examination of evidence pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3),
such order shall be so issued that the examination of all evidences
required to be examined in the case is made at the same time as far as
possible.
Subsequent to the order appointing the date for
appearance pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the concerned party to
the case shall submit or produce such evidence or witness before the
court on the appointed date for appearance as required to be
submitted or produced by that party.
126. Party or witness held in detention or imprisonment to be
produced: (1) If any party or witness of a case, who is held in
detention or imprisonment, is required to be produced to make his or
her statement or deposition or in relation to another case relevant to
him or her, the court shall, setting out the reason, order the concerned
office to produce such party or witness before the court on the date
appointed for appearance for that purpose.
Upon receipt of an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office shall produce before the court such party or witness
accompanied by the security personnel.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if there is a reasonable reason for not being able to produce such
party or witness before the court because of security or physical
disability, such office may, with the consent of the court, arrange for
the examination of him or her through video conference.
If any party or witness of a case is examined through
video conference pursuant to sub-section (3), the matters stated by
him or her shall be recorded.
127. Order of examining evidence: (1) Except as otherwise ordered by
the court, the evidence of the plaintiff shall first be examined and
then the evidence of the defendant shall be examined on the date
appointed for appearance for the examination of evidence, subject to
the law of evidence.
If one party makes any objection immediately that any
evidence produced by the other party or matter deposed by any
witness is not admissible in evidence or should not be taken as
evidence or is irrelevant to the case, the judge shall immediately
decide whether the objection is reasonable or not.
The court shall not allow any party to produce any
evidence which is irrelevant to the case.
128. Provisions relating to trial of person of unsound mind: (1) If
there is any reasonable reason to believe that any accused person,
being of unsound mind, is incapable of making his or her defense,
the court may also order causing such person to be examined and
treated by a licensed doctor.
If, upon the examination made pursuant to sub-section
(1), it appears that the accused is incapable of making his or her
defense because of unsound mind, the court shall adjourn the case in
the case of such person, by executing a memorandum of order to that
effect.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, if such accused is held in detention and the court so considers
reasonable, it may, at the time when proceeding is conducted
pursuant to sub-section (1) or subsequent to the execution of the
memorandum of order pursuant to sub-section (2), release such
accused from detention.
In releasing the accused pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court shall cause his or her guardian to make a bond that he or she
shall take care of the accused in a manner to prevent the accused
from doing any kind of injury or harm to any other person and
produce the accused before the court when so ordered by the court.
In releasing the accused pursuant to sub-section (4), the
court may take bail/bond or guarantee from the guardian in
accordance with Chapter-7.
Except where the accused, who is held in detention and
is of unsound mind, is released from detention pursuant to subsection (3), the court shall order the concerned prison to take special
care of such accused placed in detention for trial.
If the case of the accused of unsound mind is adjourned
pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall, whenever the accused
becomes of sound mind, revive the adjournment, cause the
appearance of the accused before the court and proceed with the trial
of the case.
Provided that prior to so reviving the adjournment, the court
shall cause the accused to be examined again by a licensed medical
doctor, and that he or she has become of sound mind shall be
certified by such doctor.
The court may, if it so wishes, order the medical doctor
who has made certification of soundness pursuant to sub-section (1)
or (7) to appear before the court as a witness.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if there are other defendants also, along with the person of
unsound mind, nothing shall be deemed to bar the hearing of the case
in the case of such other defendants.
129. Trial of cases to be conducted in open bench: The court shall
conduct the trial of cases in open bench.
Provided that the trail of a case related to the offence of
espionage, human trafficking and transportation, sexual offence, a
case involving a child as the accused or victim, violence against
women, rape, incest or a case running between husband and wife or
any other case that the court has, considering it reasonable to do so,
ordered for trial in camera, may be conducted in camera, and the
court may prohibit the access to such bench of any person, other than
the concerned parties to that case, concerned law practitioners,
employees of the court and such other persons as the court considers
necessary.
130. Law practitioner may be appointed by the accused for his or her
defense: (1) Any person accused of any offence may appoint a law
practitioner of his or her choice for his or her defense, rebutting the
charge made against him or her, and pleading the case.
If an accused who is charged with the offence
punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for life or for a term of ten
years or more fails to appoint his or her law practitioner, the court
may, in the case of such accused, order that the law practitioner
appointed by the court defend him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, even if any accused does not intend to appoint a law
practitioner pursuant to sub-section (1) or refuses to have defended
by the law practitioner appointed by the court pursuant to sub-section
(2), nothing shall be deemed to prevent proceeding the case.
131. Judgment to be made: (1) The judge shall make judgment in a case
generally within one month after the termination of examination of
evidence in the case.
If it is not possible to make judgment within the period
referred to in sub-section (1), information thereof, accompanied by
the reason for the same, shall be given to the appeal hearing court.
Judgment to be made pursuant to this Section shall be in
the form referred to in Schedule-43 and state, inter alia, the
following matters:
Short description of the case and other necessary
matters relevant thereto,
Main points of pleading, if any, made by the law
practitioner in the case,
Evidence produced by the parties to the case,
credibility or refutability of such evidence, the
basis thereof, sufficiency or insufficiency of such
evidence,
Matters relating to the legal question, if any,
raised by any party to the case,
Grounds for the conviction or acquittal of offence
and the reasons for the same,
Whether the judgment is appealable or not, and
the court in which appeal shall lie,
Other necessary matters.
In making judgment pursuant to this Section, the judge
may read out the full text of the judgment, if prepared, and the
decision only if the full text is not so prepared.
If only the decision is read out pursuant to sub-section
(4), the judge shall cause it to be taken down in short hand in the
decision book, sign it and take signature or thumb impression of the
parties to the case who are in attendance on it.
Provided that it shall not be necessary to cause it to be signed
by the government attorney in a state case in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff.
If a decision is read out pursuant to sub-section (5), the
judge shall write down the judgment and keep it in the case-file
within one month.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
"decision read out" means the decision read out upon sentencing.
If the judgment is not set down within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (6), the concerned party may make a
complaint to the Chief Judge of the concerned High Court, in the
case of a judgment of that High Court or a court subordinate to it,
and to the Chief Justice in the case of a judgment of the Supreme
Court, not later than three days after the expiration of such timelimit.
If a complaint is made pursuant to sub-section (7), the
concerned Chief Judge or the Chief Justice shall give direction to the
concerned judge to prepare the judgment within a week.
The court shall, as far as possible, also put the decision
referred to in sub-section (5) on its website immediately.
(10) The court shall affix the decisions prepared and
authenticated in each week on its notice board and also put them on
the website.
132. Notice and copy of judgment to be given: (1) The court shall give a
notice of judgment in the form referred to in Schedule-44 to the
accused or defendant who has not been involved in the proceedings
of the case from the beginning, the accused held in detention or
imprisonment or the accused of a case heard ex parte.
The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be served
as if it were a summons, and if such notice cannot be served, it shall
be published in any national daily newspaper owned by the
Government of Nepal.
The concerned party shall bear the expenses to be
incurred in the publication of a notice referred to in sub-section (2) in
relation to any case under Schedule-4.
The information of judgment of any of the cases under
Schedule-1, Schedule-2 and Schedule-3 shall also be given to the
concerned government attorney office.
133. Dismissal of cases on death: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, if the accused or defendant of any
case dies, the court shall dismiss such case.
Provided that if there are more than one accused or defendant,
the case shall not be dismissed even on the death of any one accused.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
despite the death of the accused or defendant in a case involving the
claimed amount, the court may decide to set the claimed amount
upon examining the evidence included in the case-file and such other
evidence as the court finds necessary to examine.
If, despite the death of any complainant in any case
referred to in sub-section (2), the successor to such complainant
appears to accept and continue the case within thirty days of his or
her death, the court may decide as to whether or not compensation
should be awarded by examining the evidence contained in the casefile and any other evidence required to be examined.
In the event of the death of a party making appeal, or
petition for review or revision or of a person who was originally
convicted of the offence in such case, the case subject to such appeal,
review or revision petition shall abate.
Provided that:
In the event of the death of any one of the same
party, the case shall not abate without trying the
case in respect of the other persons,
In respect of a case involving any claimed
amount, the successor may, if he or she so
wishes, take over the case within thirty-five days
from the date of receipt of information.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Appeal and Reference for Sanction
134. Appeal to lie: (1) A party who is not satisfied with a judgment or
final order made by a court may make an appeal within thirty days
from the date of knowledge of the judgment.
Provided that if an appealing party makes a petition showing
the cause of being unable to make appeal within that time-limit and
the appeal hearing court considers the petition to be reasonable, it
may order the extension of the time-limit for a maximum of thirty
days.
A person wishing to make an appeal pursuant to subsection (1) shall file it with the court which hears appeals from the
court making judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Act, if any party to a case or his or her attorney is present, or his or
her law practitioner has made pleadings, before the court at the time
of hearing and judgment is made on the same day, the party to the
case shall be deemed to have known that such judgment has been
made.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the party shall be deemed to have ipso facto known the
judgment after the expiry of a period of one year from the date of
judgment.
135. Filing of appeal through judgment making court or prison where
one is imprisoned: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (2) of Section 134, any person wishing to make appeal
pursuant to sub-section (1) of that Section may make appeal through
the judgment making court or also through the prison where the
person convicted of the offence pursuant to such judgment is
imprisoned.
If an appeal is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), such
court or prison shall, as soon as possible, forward the appeal to the
appeal hearing court, setting out the details of the service or
payment, if any, by the appellant of the sentence imposed on him or
her or the bail/bond or guarantee, if any, furnished by him or her in
consideration for such sentence, and give information thereof to the
appellant.
The judgment making court shall forward the case-file
along with the appeal pursuant to sub-section (2).
136. Procedures to be fulfilled in making appeal: (1) A memorandum
of appeal shall be made in the form referred to in Schedule-45.
Every memorandum of appeal to be made pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall clearly state, inter alia, the full name and
address of the appellant and that of the respondent, short description
of the case, the matters contained in the decision of the lower court
with which the appellant is dissatisfied and grounds for such
dissatisfaction, the matters to be decided by the appeal hearing court
and the relevant laws, and shall bear signature or thumb impression
of the appellant.
Every memorandum of appeal to be made pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by the following documents:
A copy of the judgment intended to be appealed
against,
If any sentence is imposed on the appellant by the
judgment, evidence showing that he or she has
served or paid such sentence or has been
imprisoned or furnished a bail/bond or guarantee
for the same.
137. To remain in imprisonment while making appeal: (1) Any of the
following persons shall remain in imprisonment while making
appeal:
A person who is sentenced to imprisonment for
life,
A person who is sentenced to imprisonment for a
term exceeding ten years,
A person who, upon being convicted of any
offence under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, is
sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding
three years,
A person who, having been remanded in
detention for trial, is convicted of the offence and
sentenced to imprisonment,
A person who is sentenced to imprisonment and
has not permanent residence in Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person who is above seventy-five years of age or a person who is
recommended by the medical board formed by the Government of
Nepal that he or she, owing to suffering from an incurable or highly
severe disease, cannot stay in detention or an offender who has not
been held in detention by an order of the court that he or she is not
required to be remanded in detention but is sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years makes a petition,
setting out the reason, for a leave of appeal without being held in
detention, and if such reason appears to be reasonable, the appeal
hearing court may, upon taking a bail/bond or guarantee from him or
her, grant the leave of appeal.
If a leave of appeal is granted pursuant to sub-section
(2), such court shall execute a memorandum of order recording the
reasons for such leave to make appeal without being held in
detention and the memorandum of order shall be included in the
case-file.
Any person other than that mentioned in sub-sections
(1) and (2) may make appeal by furnishing with the court passing
judgment or the appeal hearing court a bail/bond or guarantee for the
sentence imposed on the person by that judgment.
If a person who does not furnish a bail/bond or
guarantee pursuant to sub-section (4) is sentenced to imprisonment,
that person may appeal only being held in imprisonment for such
sentence.
If decision cannot be made on the appeal made by a
person who is imprisoned for being unable to furnish a bail/bond or
guarantee pursuant to sub-section (2) or (4) within six months from
the date of filing of such appeal, the concerned appeal hearing court
shall try the case by releasing that person from imprisonment after
the said period and holding him or her on recognizance.
In the event of failure to make judgment within the
period referred to in sub-section (6), such court shall give
information thereof, accompanied by the reason therefor, to the court
hearing appeal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section:
(a) In the case of a person who having been held in
detention or imprisonment in the course of
proceedings of the case has already served the
sentence as commuted by the judgment, such person
shall not be required to remain in prison or furnish a
bail/bond or guarantee to make appeal,
(b) No person shall be imprisoned for a period in excess
of the sentence imposed by the judgment only by the
reason that appeal has been made.
(9) In the case of a person furnishing a bail/bond or guarantee
pursuant to Chapter-7, such bail/bond or guarantee may, to the extent
of the sufficiency of such bail/bond or guarantee, be maintained as a
bail/bond or guarantee, for the purposes of this Section.
(10) In taking a bail/bond or guarantee pursuant to this
Section, the court may, having regard to the need and propriety,
require and take the bail/bond or guarantee also for such claimed
amount of a governmental or public body as is held recoverable by
the judgment.
(11) If the bail/bond or guarantee of any property belonging
to any person other than the appellant has been furnished, such
property shall not be maintained as a bail/bond or guarantee for the
purposes of this Section without the consent of that person.
138. Calling for case file: (1) Except in cases where the case-file is
received pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 135, the appeal
hearing court shall, upon the filing of an appeal, and as soon as
possible, order the concerned court to send the case-file of such case.
The concerned court shall send the case-file to the
appeal hearing court within three days from the date of receipt of the
order pursuant to sub-section (1).
139. Appointment of date for appearance for hearing appeal: Upon
receipt of the case-file pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 135 or

Section 138, the appeal hearing court shall appoint the date for
appearance for the hearing of the appeal.
140. Hearing of appeal: (1) The appeal hearing court shall complete the
hearing of appeal within six months after the date of receipt of the
case-file from the lower court.
If, while hearing the appeal pursuant to sub-section (1),
the appeal hearing court considers that the decision made by the
lower court is reasonable and does not suffer any substantial
difference, it may dismiss the appeal, by recording its reasons for
doing so.
If, except for the dismissal of the appeal plea pursuant
to sub-section (2), it appears that the pleas of the appeal should be
heard, the appeal hearing court shall, setting out the reasons for the
same, appoint the date for appearance for the hearing of the appeal
and give a notice to the respondent to rebut the pleas of appeal.
In giving a notice referred to in sub-section (3), a notice
of fifteen days shall be given, also accompanied by a copy of the
memorandum of appeal.
(5) A person who has obtained a notice pursuant to sub-section
(3) may submit defense in writing to defend himself or herself and
rebut the pleas of appeal, within the period specified by the court.
(6) The defense in writing to be submitted to the court pursuant
to sub-section (5) shall be in the form set forth in Schedule-46.
(7) Upon hearing the appeal pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court shall decide the appeal.
141. Appeal liable to be heard ex parte in absence of respondent: (1)
If the respondent does not appear within the time-limit of the notice
given pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 140, the appeal hearing
court may appoint such another date for appearance for deciding the
appeal as falling after at least fifteen days, and hear the appeal ex
parte on such date and decide it.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if the respondent makes a petition, prior to the date appointed for
appearance pursuant to sub-section (1), showing a reasonable reason
for being unable to appear within the time-limit of the notice given
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 140, and such reason seems to
be reasonable, the court shall order the extension of the time-limit,
showing such reason, and also order the respondent to appear on the
date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1), and hear and decide the
appeal.
142. Not required to be on recognizance: (1) If an appellant or
respondent does not wish to remain on recognizance in the course of
the appeal proceedings, he or she may make a petition to that effect
to the court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court may discontinue his or her appearance on the appointed dates,
by getting a deed to be executed by the appellant or respondent to the
effect that he or she will appear as and when the court so requires.
Provided that the appellant or respondent who is not on
recognizance may, if he or she so wishes, appear on the date
appointed for appearance for the hearing of the appeal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if, during the hearing of appeal, the court is of the opinion
that the appellant should be inquired into any matter or required to
produce any evidence in relation to the appeal, the court may order
the appellant to keep on appearing on the appointed dates for
appearance.
143. Service of notice or order on appellant or respondent as if it were
a summons: The notice or order to be issued by the court to the
appellant or respondent pursuant to Section 140, 141 or 142 shall be
served in accordance with Chapter-6 as if it were a summons.
144. Powers of appeal hearing court: (1) In hearing the appeal pursuant
to this Chapter, the appeal hearing court shall have the following
powers:
To approve, void or reverse or partially reverse the
judgment of the lower court,
To reduce or enhance the extent of the sentence
commuted by the lower court to the offender, or to
alter the sentence,
Where the judgment has been made without
examining such evidence as required to have been
examined, to make such examination by itself or to
order the lower court to make such examination,
If any particular matter required to have been
adjudged in the case has not been adjudged, to
adjudge itself or order the lower court to adjudge
such matter.
If an appeal from the judgment passed by the lower
court is made by any particular offender or complainant only, and the
decision on the appeal will render the judgment of the lower court to
be affected in the case of the offender or defendant not making
appeal, the appeal hearing court, in exercise of the powers set forth
in sub-section (1), may, setting out and recording the reasons
therefor, pass judgment in accordance with law also in the case of
such accused.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the appeal hearing court may, as required, exercise such
powers as may be exercised by the lower court.
145. Reference for sanction: (1) If any court passes judgment
commuting a sentence of imprisonment for a term of twenty years or
more or imprisonment for life to any person, it shall refer such
judgment for sanction, accompanied by the case-file, to the appeal
hearing court within thirty-five days from the date of passage of such
judgment.
If a reference for sanction is made pursuant to subsection (1) and even the appeal hearing court passes judgment
confirming the sentence of imprisonment for a term of twenty years
or more or imprisonment for life to the accused, such judgment shall
then be referred to the Supreme Court for sanction.
146. Appeal against reference judgment: A party, who is dissatisfied
with the judgment so passed by the court as to be referred to for
sanction pursuant to Section 145, may appeal against it.
147. Not to pass reference judgment until expiration of time-limit for
appeal: (1) In any case submitted for reference pursuant to Section
145, no reference judgment shall be made until the time-limit
allowed for preferring an appeal expires.
If an appeal is made within the time-limit referred to in
sub-section (1), the records of reference judgment shall be crossed
off and the case shall be heard on appeal.
Provided that if an appeal is made by any person only, out of
the persons subjected to sentence, decision shall be made by virtue of
the same appeal also in cases of those who have not made appeal.
148. Procedures for making reference for sanction: (1) In referring a
judgment for sanction in any case pursuant to Section 145, the court
shall forward the case-file of that case along with the reference.
If the accused is held in detention in the case in which
reference judgment is made pursuant to sub-section (1), reference
shall also specify the date on which the accused was held in
detention and the name of the prison where he or she is being kept,
and details of the accused if he or she has absconded or escaped from
the detention.
The other procedures on the hearing of reference for
sanction shall be the same as applicable to the hearing of appeal.
149. Powers of court in dealing with reference for sanction: (1) Any
court dealing with reference may exercise such powers as may be
exercised by the appeal hearing court.
If, in examining a reference for sanction, it appears that
the verdict of the judgment of the lower court is not in order and any
alteration can be made therein, the concerned parties shall be
summoned to appear, by giving the time-limit of fifteen days.
150. Appeal and reference judgment: The appeal judgment shall be
made in the form referred to in Schedule-47, and the reference
judgment in the form referred to in Schedule-48.
Provided that where a single judgment has to be made on
appeal and on reference for sanction, such judgment shall be made in
the form referred to in Schedule-47.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Execution of Judgments
151. To establish record of sentence: (1) If the court passes any
judgment in any case, the concerned court shall establish a record of
the sentence, fine or the established claimed amount or compensation
pursuant to such judgment.
If the appeal hearing court passes judgment convicting
any person of any offence or any person is convicted of any offence
being judgment of the lower court reversed or voided, it shall
establish a record thereof and send a copy of the judgment to the
concerned District Court for its execution.
After establishing a record pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the concerned court shall execute the judgment, and if any body
has to do any act for the execution of judgment, it shall order the
body to do such act.
While making an order pursuant to sub-section (3), if
the person sentenced to imprisonment is present in the court, the
court shall also forward him or her to the prison; and if such person
is neither present in the court nor held in detention or prison, the
court shall send an order, in the form referred to in Schedule-49, to
the concerned police office to arrest and hand over him or her to the
prison.
If the same offender is liable to more than one sentence
and there is a doubt as to which sentence is the higher, the prison
office shall write to the concerned district court and do as sanctioned
by the district court.
152. Bodies for judgment execution: (1) The District Court where the
charge sheet or plaint has been filed shall execute the judgment on a
case irrespective of the tier of court making such judgment.
The concerned District Court shall also execute a
judgment on a case proceeded and adjudicated originally by the
appeal hearing court.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the District Court responsible for the execution of a
judgment cannot be identified because of the number of defendants,
location of their residence or property, the District Court designated
by the appeal hearing court shall execute the judgment of such case.
The concerned bodies shall execute judgments made by
the judicial bodies other than the regular courts.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the concerned District Court shall execute the judgment pursuant to
this Act, unless otherwise provided by law in respect of judgment
execution.
153. Postponement of execution of judgments: (1) The court shall
postpone the execution of a judgment in the following circumstance:
(a) If an appeal is made in a case which is appealable
pursuant to law, until the case is finally adjudicated
on appeal, or if no such appeal is made, until the
time-limit allowed for preferring appeal is expired,
(b) If the case is one requiring reference for sanction
pursuant to law, until the reference made for
sanction is decided.
When an appeal is made pursuant to clause (a) of subsection (1), the appellant shall submit a petition stating that matter to
the concerned court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a judgment is made holding any offender liable to a sentence of
imprisonment, such offender shall be immediately sent to
imprisonment, except as otherwise provided in this Act.
154. Confinement in prison: (1) Upon receipt of an order referred to in

Section 151 or upon the person held to be offender being arrested by
the police office, the concerned prison office shall confine the
offender in prison in accordance with law.
Provided that if a child below eighteen years of age is
convicted of an offence, the child shall be held in a separate children
reform home or similar other home as provided by the Government
of Nepal.
While confining an offender in prison pursuant to subsection (1), the prison office shall prepare and update the record
containing information, inter alia, of when the offender has been
confined in prison or arrested and when the service of the sentence of
imprisonment will complete.
155. Payment of money in lieu of imprisonment: (1) If, in view of the
age of the offender who is convicted, at the first instance, of any
offence punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year or less, gravity of the offence, manner of commission of the
offence and his or her conduct, as well, the court does not consider it
appropriate to confine the offender in prison and is of the view that
there will be no threat to the public peace, law and order if he or she
is released, and the court, for the reasons to be recorded, considers it
appropriate to dispense with the requirement of undergoing
imprisonment upon payment of a fine in lieu of imprisonment, the
court may order that the offender be not liable to undergo
imprisonment if he or she makes payment of money in lieu of
imprisonment.
Prior to issuing an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall cause a deed to be executed by the offender that he or she
will not commit any kind of offence henceforth and will comply with
good conduct.
In making payment of money by an offender who is
dispensed with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment upon
payment of money in lieu of imprisonment pursuant to sub-section
(1), the offender shall pay money by three hundred rupees a day of
imprisonment.
If any offender who is dispensed with the requirement
of undergoing imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1) commits any
offense punishable by a sentence of imprisonment within three years
after the date of such release, the sentence also including that of
imprisonment imposed on him or her by the previous judgment shall
be executed.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any foreign national who has been convicted of any
offence punishable by a sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year or less and is in detention or imprisonment makes a petition for
dispensing with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment upon
payment of a fine in lieu of the imprisonment, and if the offence is
not any offence set forth in sub-section (4) of Section 159, and the
court considers appropriate to release that offender from
imprisonment upon payment of a fine in lieu of the imprisonment,
the court may order that the offender will not be liable to undergo
imprisonment if he or she makes payment in lump sum of the
amount to be set by five hundred rupees a day.
In making an order pursuant to sub-section (5), the court
shall order that such person be sent out of Nepal within seven days
and the immigration office shall send such person out of Nepal
pursuant to the court order.
Fifty percent of the amount received pursuant to subsections (3) and (5) shall be deposited into the victim relief fund
established in accordance with law.
If payment of money is made pursuant to this Section,
the offender shall be deemed to have served the sentence of
imprisonment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the record of imprisonment of the person who is dispensed
with the requirement of undergoing imprisonment pursuant to this
Section shall remain valid until the period of completion of the
service of the sentence of imprisonment, and the court may, at any
time, revoke the order under this Section if he or she upholds
conduct or commits offence, contrary to sub-sections (2) and (4).
(10) If an order is revoked pursuant to sub-section (9), such
offender shall serve the whole sentence commuted to him or her, by
undergoing imprisonment.
156. Property to be attached: (1) If the property belonging to a person
against whom a warrant for arrest has been issued pursuant to subsection (4) of Section 151 has not been attached earlier or if such
person cannot be arrested, the concerned police office may make a
report, also indicating the description of his or her property, to the
court for making attachment to the property to which such person has
partition entitlement.
If a report is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall issue an order to the concerned land revenue
office or other body or institution to attach the property to which
such person has entitlement.
If, in attaching the property pursuant to sub-section (2),
property more than that required to be attached has been attached,
such person may make a petition to the concerned court to release
such excess property attached.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3) and,
upon examination of such petition, it appears that excess property
has been so attached, the court may make an order to the concerned
land revenue office or body or institution to release the attachment of
such excess property, and if such order is made, such office or body
shall release such property.
If an offender is liable to pay the claimed amount,
compensation or other amount pursuant to a judgment of the court,
such amount shall, in accordance with this Chapter, be recovered
from the property attached pursuant to sub-section (1), and only the
remaining property shall be attached.
157. Property may be auctioned: (1) If any offender cannot be arrested
even until six months from the date of issue of warrant for arresting
that offender pursuant to sub-section (4) of Section 151, the amount
of fine or compensation payable as per the judgment shall be
recovered by receiving cash from the concerned body or institution if
the property attached pursuant to Section 156 is cash and by
auctioning the property so attached if it is other movable or
immovable property and paying the amount in consideration for a
fine or government claimed amount to the consolidated fund, and the
amount remaining upon payment of compensation, if any, shall be
returned to his or her successor.
If the offender is arrested before terminating the record
of sentence pursuant to this Act and intends to pay in cash the fine,
claimed amount or compensation to which he or she is liable, the
sentence of imprisonment shall be executed by returning to him or
her the property attached pursuant to Section 156, upon recovering
the expenses incurred in the execution of such attachment if such
property has not yet been auctioned, and the proceeds of the auction
sale of the property upon recovering the expenses incurred in the
execution of such attachment and auction, if such property has been
auctioned.
158. Remission of sentence in the event of death of the person
sentenced: (1) In the event of the death of a person who is convicted
by the court of an offence and sentenced therefor, the whole sentence
of imprisonment or fine remaining to be executed until the time of
his or her death shall ipso facto be remitted.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person liable to pay any governmental or personal claimed
amount, compensation or other amount dies before making such
payment, such amount or compensation shall, in accordance with this
Act, be recovered from the property belonging to that person only to
the extent of the amount recoverable from such property.
making
recovery
claimed
amount,
compensation or amount pursuant to sub-section (2), the
governmental
claimed
amount,
compensation
personal
compensation and claimed amount shall be recovered in respective
order of priority from the property to the extent of recoverability
from the property of such person.
159. Pardon many be made: (1) A person who is sentenced by a court
judgment to punishment for an offence may make a petition to the
President, through the Ministry of Home Affairs, for the pardon,
suspension, alteration or reduction of that sentence.
In making a petition pursuant to sub-section (1), the
petitioner shall attach a copy of the judgment of the court by which
he or she was sentenced.
If a petition made pursuant to sub-section (1) is
forwarded by the President to the Ministry of Home Affairs for
necessary action, the Ministry shall, having regard to the following
matters, make a submission to the Government of Nepal to decide
whether or not to pardon, suspend, alter or reduce the sentence
imposed on the petitioner:
Nature of the offence, and the circumstances
under which the offence was committed,
Age and physical condition of the offender,
Limit/ceiling of the sentence imposed on the
offender,
Whether or not the offender was sentenced to
imprisonment for committing any offence prior to
that punishment sentenced to him or her, and if he
or she was so sentenced, the nature of such
offence and the sentence served by him or her,
Whether or not the offender is held in detention.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in subsection (3), no action may be taken to pardon, suspend, alter or
reduce the sentence imposed on the offender of any of the following
offences:
(a) Corruption,
(b) Torture,
(c) Rape,
(d) Murder in a cruel and inhumane way or by taking
control,
(e) Genocide,
(f) Explosives,
(g) Kidnapping, hostage-taking or enforced disappearance,
(h) Human trafficking and transportation,
(i) Money laundering, and
Narcotic drugs trafficking or transaction punishable
by a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding
three years.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the case is under consideration of any court by way of
appeal, reference for sanction, review or revision or if the sentence
imposed by the judgment of a court has not become final, the
Ministry of Home Affairs may not take action referred to in subsection (3).
Prior to making a decision pursuant to sub-section (3),
the Government of Nepal may consult the parole and probation
board established by law.
(7) If, while making decision pursuant to sub-section (3), the
Government of Nepal has any reasonable reason for pardoning the
whole or any part of, suspending, altering or reducing, the sentence
imposed on the petitioner, it shall make a recommendation,
accompanied by its opinion along with the grounds therefor, to the
President.
If the sentence imposed on any offender is pardoned,
suspended, altered or reduced by the President pursuant to the
recommendation made by the Government of Nepal under subsection (7), the Government of Nepal shall give a notice thereof to
the concerned court.
After receiving the notice referred to in sub-section (8),
the concerned court shall accordingly void or update the records
thereof.
(10) The judgment of the concerned court shall not be voided
by the reason of pardon, alteration or reduction of the sentence
imposed on any person granted by the President pursuant to this
Section, and it shall not affect in any manner the sentence already
served or fine or claimed amount already paid by such person.
(11) The Government of Nepal may make necessary
standards for the purpose of making proposal or recommendation
pursuant to sub-sections (3) and (7).
160. Records to be voided: (1) The court shall, in the following
circumstance, void the records of sentence established pursuant to
sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 151, by setting out the reasons
therefor:
If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
the offender pursuant to this Chapter,
If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
the offender by labor pursuant to the law in force,
If the sentence of imprisonment or punishment is
remitted due to the death of the offender as
mentioned in Section 158,
If the sentence of imprisonment has been served by
the offender in a reform home or community center
or by doing community service in accordance with
the law in force,
If the sentence imposed on the offender is pardoned
in whole pursuant to Section 159,
If the offender pays the full amount for the fine or
claimed amount or compensation pursuant to this
Chapter, or
If amount in lieu of imprisonment or sentence or
claimed amount or compensation imposed on the
offender is recovered pursuant to this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any person, who is sentenced to imprisonment or required to
undergo imprisonment for a fine or government claimed amount or
any other amount in accordance with the law in force, fails to appear
in the court or to undergo imprisonment in the prison or cannot be
arrested until the following period, the court shall void the records of
sentence established in the case of such person:
Fifty years in the case of the sentence of
imprisonment for life,
Forty years in the case of the sentence of
imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years,
Thirty years in the case of the sentence of
imprisonment for a term of five to ten years,
Twenty years in the case of the sentence of
imprisonment for a term of one to five years,
Twelve years in the case of the sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year.
If a person whose record is voided pursuant to subsection (2) is found after the expiry of the said period, the court shall
execute the judgment in accordance with this Chapter as if the record
were not voided in the case of him or her.
In voiding the record pursuant to sub-section (2), the
property belonging to that person, if any, attached pursuant to this
Act, shall be forfeited and auctioned, and the proceeds of sale by
auction shall be credited to the consolidated fund.
No person whose record has been voided by the reason
of the non-completion of the service of sentence pursuant to this
Section shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the law in force,
be eligible to be appointed, nominated, designated or elected to any
public office until such person serves such sentence pursuant to the
judgment awarding the sentence.
161. Period of detention undergone to be set off against sentence of
imprisonment: (1) If a person who, on conviction, is sentenced to
imprisonment by a court judgment, has remained in detention or
custody in the course of investigation, the period of such detention or
custody shall be set off against the term of imprisonment imposed on
him or her by the judgment, and such offender shall be imprisoned
only for the remaining term of imprisonment.
If any offender who is not sentenced to imprisonment
but to a fine only has remained in detention or custody in the course
of investigation, the total amount to be set by three hundred rupees a
day of the period of his or her detention or custody shall be set off
against the amount of fine payable by him or her.
162. Execution of sentence of fine: (1) Every person who is required to
pay a fine in accordance with the records established pursuant to

Section 151 shall pay the fine immediately.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if such person is not able to immediately pay the amount of fine but
furnishes a property as the guarantee for the payment of such
amount, the court may order that the amount of fine be paid up
within one year in a maximum of three installments.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
if the person so sentenced to fine has furnished any bail/bond or
guarantee pursuant to Chapter 7 or Section 137, the court shall order
that the amount of fine be recovered from such bail/bond or
guarantee and only the remaining amount be paid in installments.
Except in cases where the provision of payment of the
amount of fine in installments is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or
the service of sentence has already been made by remaining in
detention or custody in the course of the proceedings of the case or
the amount of fine is recoverable from the bail/bond or guarantee
furnished pursuant to Chapter 7 or Section 137, the court shall order
the concerned prison to imprison the offender in lieu of the fine if he
or she fails to pay the amount of fine immediately.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (4) and the
offender who fails to pay the amount of fine pays some amount of
fine or if the offender has remained in custody or detention in the
course of the proceedings of the case and there is a situation that the
period of such custody or detention undergone by him or her is to be
set off against the period of imprisonment, the period of
imprisonment in the default of payment of the amount of fine shall
be set by setting off the said period of imprisonment undergone, and
the offender shall be imprisoned only for the remaining period in
proportion to the period so set and the total amount of the fine.
163. Provisions relating to government claimed amount or other
amount: (1) If a judgment decrees that the claimed amount be
recovered, the recovery of a government claimed amount shall have
priority over the recovery of a personal claimed amount.
Provided that if any judgment has been made to recover a
personal claimed amount before making the judgment to the effect
that a governmental claimed amount be recovered, no priority shall
be given to the government claimed amount.
If the government claimed amount or other amount has
not been recovered pursuant to the judgment or there is a situation
that such amount cannot be recovered, except where the property
belonging to the offender liable to pay such claimed amount or other
amount has already been attached previously, such property shall be
attached as soon as possible after the passage of the judgment.
If the offender fails to pay the claimed amount or other
amount referred to in sub-section (1) within thirty days from the date
on which the judgment becomes final, such amount shall be
recovered, in the case of a movable property attached pursuant to
sub-section (2), by receiving such movable property from the body
holding it, and in the case of an immovable property so attached, by
auctioning such immovable property.
Such person shall be imprisoned for the government
claimed amount that has not been recovered even from the proceeds
of the auction of the property pursuant to sub-section (3).
164. Imprisonment for government claimed amount: (1) The
concerned person shall pay any government claimed amount or any
other amount held by a court judgment to be recoverable.
If such person fails to pay the government claimed
amount or other amount referred to in sub-section (1), such amount
shall be recovered by forfeiting his or her property.
If any government claimed amount or other amount
could not be recovered even by making forfeiture referred to in subsection (2), the sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
the following term for the following claimed amount or such amount
shall be set for such person:
One month for the claimed amount of five
thousand to ten thousand rupees,
Three months for the claimed amount of ten
thousand to twenty-five thousand rupees,
Six months for the claimed amount of twenty-five
thousand to fifty thousand rupees,
One year for the claimed amount of fifty
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees,
Six months for every fifty thousand rupees over
one hundred thousand rupees.
One shall be sentenced to imprisonment for an amount
less than that set forth in clause (a) of sub-section (3) in a manner to
set off three hundred rupees for each day.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in sentencing to imprisonment for a government claimed
amount, such sentence of imprisonment shall not be set to exceed
seven years.
165. Procedures for recovering personal claimed amount or
compensation: (1) A person shall pay such personal claimed amount
held to be payable by him or her, compensation or other amount to
which the victim or his or her successor is entitled under the
judgment of a court to the person who is entitled to get such payment
within six months from the date of judgment.
If such person fails to pay such claimed amount,
compensation or amount within the period referred to in sub-section
(1), he or she shall be liable to a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees.
If the person required to pay such claimed amount,
compensation or other amount within the period referred to in subsection (1), the person who is entitled to the recovery of such
claimed amount, compensation or other amount may make a petition
within three years from the date of final judgment, showing the
property owned by the person liable to pay such claimed amount,
compensation or other amount.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court shall cause such claimed amount, compensation or other
amount to be recovered respectively by attaching and auctioning the
said property.
If the person liable to pay a claimed amount,
compensation or other amount pursuant to sub-section (1) pays the
same to the court or if the claimed amount, compensation or other
amount is recovered from the bail/bond or guarantee if any,
furnished pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 68, recovery shall be
made accordingly.
If the person entitled to the recovery of a claimed
amount, compensation or other amount is not able to find the
property within the period referred to in sub-section (3), the court
shall abate the petition, subject to the execution of recovery if he or
she gives intimation as and when such property is found.
If the claimed amount, compensation or other amount
could not be recovered pursuant to sub-section (4), the person
entitled to recover the remaining claimed amount, compensation or
other amount which could not be so recovered may make a petition
for imprisoning the offender, within thirty days from the date of
auction sale of the property of the offender or the date of abatement
of the petition pursuant to sub-section (6).
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (7), the
court shall convert the remaining claimed amount or other amount
into the term of imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees a
day, and the person liable to pay such claimed amount or other
amount shall be imprisoned accordingly.
While imprisoning any person pursuant to sub-section
(8), such person shall not be imprisoned for more than two years in
the case of a claimed amount of a particular person and for more than
four years in the case of a claimed amount of a public body under
full or majority ownership or control of the Government of Nepal,
State Government or Local Level.
Provided that while imprisoning any person for the nonrecovery of compensation, such person may be imprisoned for up to
four years.
(10) While imprisoning any person for a personal claimed
amount, compensation or other amount pursuant to sub-section (8), if
the claimed amount remains or is less than three hundred rupees,
such person shall be imprisoned for one day for the same.
(11) While imprisoning any person pursuant to sub-section
(8), the Government of Nepal shall bear such ration expenses as
should be provided under law.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the person required to pay a claimed amount,
compensation or other amount is held to have concealed or converted
in any manner his or her property within the period set forth in subsection (1) or (3), twenty-five percent of such property shall devolve
on one who discovers it, the remaining shall be used to pay the
claimed amount, compensation or other amount and further
remaining
shall
deposited
consolidated
fund,
notwithstanding anything contained in the law in force.
166. Recovery of amount under judgment from bail/bond: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any
offender has furnished any amount as a bail/bond pursuant to this
Act, the fine, claimed amount, compensation or other amount
payable by him or her by virtue of the judgment shall be recovered or
caused to be recovered from that amount of bail/bond to the extent it
is covered by such amount of bail/bond.
In making recovery pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall
be made in order of the following priority:
Fine,
Claimed amount,
Compensation,
Any other amount, if any.
full recovery of
claimed
amount,
compensation or other amount cannot be made, or caused to be
made, from the amount referred to in sub-section (1), only the
remainder of the recoverable amount shall be recovered, or caused to
be recovered, upon taking action pursuant to this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, except where any offender pays immediately the fine,
claimed amount, compensation or other amount required to be paid
by him or her pursuant to the judgment or its recovery can be made
pursuant to sub-section (1), the fine, compensation or other amount
shall be recovered by auctioning the property, if any, furnished as
security/guarantee by him or her or by any other person on his or her
behalf in accordance with this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any other person has provided his or her property as a
bail/bond or guarantee in favour of any offender, before auctioning
the property of such other person, the court shall give a notice to him
or her to pay the fine, claimed amount, compensation or other
amount payable pursuant to the judgment within forty-five days, and
if such person pays such amount within the said time, the property up
to the limit of his or her bail/bond or guarantee shall be released.
In the case of the remainder of the amount which cannot
be recovered from the property referred to in sub-section (3), it shall
be recovered by auctioning the offender’s other property; and while
so making recovery, recovery shall be made in priority referred to in
sub-section (2).
If the offender's partition share has not been set aside
for the purpose of making auction pursuant to sub-section (6),
auction shall be made by setting aside his or her partition share in
accordance with law.
167. Procedures for attachment, forfeiture or control of property:
(1) While attaching, forfeiting or taking control of the property of
any offender pursuant to this Act, the concerned court shall follow
the following procedures:
If the property is being registered or licensed
separately, to give a notice of attachment to the
office responsible for registering, transmitting,
issuing or renewing the license,
If the property is cash, to give a notice of
attachment to the body holding such cash,
If the property is that crops or rent can be
harvested in or collected from it, the court shall
order the concerned Local Level to collect such
corps or rent and pay the amount into the deposit
account,
If it is the property subject to speedy decay or
spoil or livestock, the court shall cause such
property to be auctioned and the proceeds of such
auction to be paid into the deposit account.
While attaching the property of any person pursuant to
this Act, if that person has lent a loan to anyone else or invested it,
the court shall issue an order to the borrower restraining him or her
from realizing the principal amount, interest or any other return of
the said loan or investment.
The court shall require the borrower to pay to it the
principal amount, interest, return or similar other amount of the loan
or investment referred to in sub-section (2).
If any other person has right in the property attached
pursuant to this Section, such person may make a complaint to the
court making attachment within thirty-five days from the date of
knowledge of such attachment, by showing his or her right in that
property.
If a complaint is made pursuant to sub-section (4), the
court shall decide as to the right in the property if it is empowered by
law to make such decision and shall forward the complaint to the
proper court, if it has no such power.
If the court makes any decision pursuant to sub-section
(5), a person who is not satisfied with such decision may make an
appeal in accordance with law.
168. To appoint date for appearance for recovery of claimed amount,
compensation or other amount: (1) While appointing a date for
appearance for causing the recovery of the claimed amount,
compensation or other amount pursuant to the judgment, the date for
appearance shall be appointed, by indicating the purpose for which
the date is so appointed.
Provided that the government party shall not be required to be
on recognizance for a government claimed amount or compensation.
If the person entitled to have recovery does not appear
on the date for appearance appointed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
recovery proceedings shall be postponed on that day.
If the person entitled to have recovery of the claimed
amount, compensation or other amount makes a petition, showing a
reasonable reason for his or her absence on the date appointed for
appearance pursuant to sub-section (1), to the court within fifteen
days, such claimed amount, compensation or other amount as is
recoverable to such person under the judgment shall be recovered to
him or her.
If the person who is entitled to have recovery of the
claimed amount, compensation or other amount and does not appear
on the date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) fails to make a
petition within the period referred to in sub-section (2), the recovery
of such claimed amount, compensation or other amount shall be
abated for one year.
If the concerned person makes appearance within the
period referred to in sub-section (4), the recovery of the claimed
amount, compensation or other amount recoverable under the
judgment shall be made.
If the concerned person fails to appear within the period
referred to in sub-section (4), no action shall thereafter be taken in
relation to the recovery of such claimed amount, compensation or
other amount.

Chapter-16
Miscellaneous
169. Cases to be tried by District Court: The case trying authority, if
any, designated by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette, shall try any of such cases set forth in the Penal Code,
and the District Court shall try the other cases.
170. Priority order for trying cases: (1) The court shall proceed, hear
and adjudicate cases as per the following order of priority:
A case to which a person held in detention in the
course of investigation is a party,
A case to which a person remanded in custody for
trial is a party,
A case to which a person held in imprisonment is a
party,
A case to which a person with disability or a child is a
party,
A case to which a person with physical disability or a
person of over seventy-five years of age is a party,
A case relating to violence against woman,
A case which is accorded priority in proceeding or
hearing pursuant to law,
A case registered earlier according to the order of
registration of cases.
While proceeding and adjudicating any case involving
any other persons, in addition to those mentioned in clauses (a), (b)
or (c) of sub-section (1), as parties, proceeding, hearing and
adjudication shall be made also in the case of such persons.
Out of the cases in which more than one person who are
remanded in detention or custody are parties, the case of the person
who has been held in detention or custody earlier shall be proceeded,
heard and adjudicated first.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3), the court may, in view of the gravity and propriety of any
case, proceed, hear and adjudicated such case by according priority
to it.
171. Index of documents: There shall be maintained an index of
documents in each case in the form referred to in Schedule-50, and
such index shall record the serial number and description of the
documents, according to the order of the date of registration.
172. Disposal of documents: After the completion of five years of the
final decision of a case, the court shall dispose the documents other
than the following documents enclosed in the case-file of the said
case:
Complaint, charge sheet or plaint,
Statement of the accused or the note of defense,
Statement equivalent to the note of defense,
Originals of evidence,
Memorandum of appeal, if any,
Petition for review or revision of the case, if any,
Judgment or final decision made by the court,
Map, inventory form, statements of property,
Such other documents as considered necessary to be
preserved in accordance with law.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "final
decision” means the decision made by the appeal hearing court in
relation to a judgment appealed for, and the decision made by the
court competent to make sanction in relation to a reference judgment.
173. Document to be translated: (1) If any document written in any
language other than the Nepali language is submitted to the court in
the form of evidence, the court may, as required, order the party who
has submitted such document to submit an authentic translation of
the document in the Nepali language.
The concerned party as ordered by the court pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall make translation of such document in the Nepali
language and submit its certified copy to the court.
If there arises any dispute as to the translation referred
to in sub-section (2), the court may summon the presence of and
examine any expert in such matter.
174. Assistance of interpreter may be taken: (1) If it is required to take
statement or deposition of any accused or witness who is unable to
understand or speak the Nepali language or for any other purpose,
the investigating authority, prosecutor or the court may take
assistance of an interpreter of the concerned language or the sign
language.
The Government of Nepal shall bear the expenses
incurred in taking assistance of the interpreter pursuant to subsection (1).
175. Copies to be provided: (1) The concerned party to a case or his or
her law practitioner may obtain a copy of any document contained in
the case-file of any case, by paying such fees as provided by law.
Provided that any law practitioner may obtain the copy of a
judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no copy of a document that has to be kept confidential pursuant to
law shall be provided.
176. Not to try case involving conflict of interest: (1) No judge shall
proceed, hear and adjudicate any of the following cases:
A case involving right, interest or concern of him or
her or his or her close relative,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the
term “close relative” means a person who is, by
relation, entitled to succeed to his or her property
upon his or her death or maternal uncle, maternal
aunt, mother's elder sister, mother's younger sister,
mother's elder sister's husband, mother's younger
sister's
husband,
mother-in-law,
father-in-law,
father’s sister, father’s sister's husband, elder
brother-in-law, younger brother-in-law, elder sisterin-law, younger sister-in-law, elder sister, younger
sister, elder sister's husband, younger sister's
husband, daughter-in-law, nephew, niece, niece's
husband, niece's daughter-in-law, maternal grandfather, maternal grand-mother or any person having
such relation in the family.
A case in which he or she has become an attorney,
law practitioner or witness on any occasion,
A case which he or she, in capacity of the judge, has
decided or made a final order therein in any court,
A case in which he or she has given opinion as to
whether or not to institute it on any occasion,
A case involving, for any other reason, a substantial
interest of him or her or any of his or her joint family
members.
If there appears any circumstance referred to in subsection (1), the judge shall make order, setting out the reason
therefor, to the effect that he or she cannot try the case.
If any judge proceeds to try, hear or adjudicate any case
in a manner contrary to sub-section (1), any party may make a
petition, accompanied by necessary evidence, for not so trying,
hearing or adjudicating the case.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
judge shall, before proceeding, hearing or adjudicating the case,
make decision as to whether the claim of such petition is reasonable
or not.
If, while making decision pursuant to sub-section (4),
the claim of petition appears reasonable or the judge himself or
herself has made order pursuant to sub-section (2) that he or she
should not proceed, hear or settle the case, such case shall be referred
to another judge, if any, in the same court and in absence of such
judge, submission shall be made to the appeal hearing court for the
transfer of the case in accordance with sub-section (3) of Section 96.
177. Acts to be done by judge himself or herself: (1) The judge himself
or herself shall do the following acts, out of the acts to be done by
the court pursuant to this Act:
Taking and recording a statement or deposition of the
accused or of a witness,
Taking an oath of a witness,
Issuing order for remanding in custody or on bail/bond
or guarantee,
Executing a memorandum of orders on matters to be
decided in the case,
Issuing an order for the examination of evidence,
Issuing an interim or interlocutory order,
Hearing of the case,
Holding preliminary and pre-trial discussion in the case,
Issuing any other kind of order as required,
Passing a judgment or final order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the following matters may be carried out as follows:
An employee in the court whose rank is at least nongazette first class may record the evidence or deposition
of a witness, at the direction of the judge.
In the absence of the judge, the senior-most employee
out of the employees present in the court may make an
order pursuant to Chapter 6 in respect of taking
depositions of the accused or remanding him or her in
custody or taking a bail/bond or guarantee from him or
Provided that the order made pursuant to this
clause shall be submitted to the judge immediately
when the judge attends the court, and the judge may,
upon examining it, uphold, void or amend that order.
The acts other than those contained in sub-section (1) or
(2) may be done by any employee subordinate to the judge, at the
direction or on the order of the latter.
178. Procedure to be followed for releasing detainee or prisoner: (1) If
any detainee or prisoner has to be released pursuant to the judgment
or order of the court, the court shall send such order stating the
reasons for release, full name and address of the detainee or prisoner
and detail of the case to the concerned prison.
Upon receipt of the order referred to in sub-section (1),
the concerned prison shall immediately release the detainee or
prisoner in pursuance of such order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1)
and (2), if any detainee or prisoner to be released pursuant to the
judgment or order is present in the court, he or she shall, upon
judgment, be released immediately and a notice thereof shall be
given to the concerned prison.
179. To give notice on release of property subject to attachment: In
releasing any property attached in accordance with this Act pursuant
to the court judgment or order, the court shall give a notice thereof to
the concerned office and the person responsible for such attachment.
180. Pleading and appeal to be made by government attorney: (1) The
government attorney shall, on behalf of the Government of Nepal,
plead and defend the cases related to the offences under Schedule-1
and Schedule-2.
The concerned authority shall file and appeal cases
related to the offences under Schedule-3, and the concerned
government attorney shall, if so requested, defend such cases.
The government attorney shall, while pleading cases,
plead them as per the prevailing norms on professional conduct.
Except as otherwise provided in the law in force, the
government attorney shall have power to make appeal against or file
a petition for the review or revision of, any judgment or order passed
or made by the court in any case referred to in sub-section (1) in the
event of not being satisfied with such judgment or order.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if it is necessary that any particular case, in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff, be pleaded by any other law
practitioner in addition to the government attorney, the concerned
body shall, assigning the reason therefor, obtain consent of the
Attorney General or the government attorney authorized by him or
her for the same.
Upon receiving the consent pursuant to sub-section (5),
such body may appoint another law practitioner.
The law practitioner appointed pursuant to sub-section
(6) shall plead the case, subject to the general direction by the
Attorney General or the government attorney authorized by him or
181. Power of government attorney to make complaint: If any decision
or order made by any judicial or quasi-judicial body has an effect in
the title, interest or concern of the Government of Nepal and there is
no authority specified by law to file the case, make appeal or review
petition or make a complaint or petition in any other manner against
such order or decision, the Attorney General or the government
attorney designated by him or her may, subject to law, make a
complaint, appeal or review or other petition to the concerned
authority against such decision or order on that matter.
182. To register document tendered for registration in court: (1) The
court shall immediately register a document tendered for registration
in it and give a receipt thereof if the document is found to meet the
requirements of the law.
If a document tendered for registration pursuant to subsection (1) is not found to meet the requirements of the law, the court
shall return the document, by making endorsement setting out its
failure to meet the requirements.
If, in relation to the matters of a document returned
upon making endorsement pursuant to sub-section (2), the document
is made to meet the requirements as set out by endorsement and is
tendered for registration within the statute of limitation or time-limit
or within seven days after the date of endorsement if that date is the
deadline for the registration of such document, it shall be registered
and proceeded with in accordance with law.
183. Identity of victim or witness may be kept secret: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if the
investigation authority thinks that the disclosure of the identity of a
person who is a victim or witness of any particular offence may be
prejudicial to the social prestige or honor of such person or witness
or may result in undue fear, terror or fright by the accused or other
party or be prejudicial to his or her body or life, the authority may
make a request to the court, through the government attorney, that
the name, surname, address of such person or witness or the name of
his or her father or any other description which may disclose his or
her identity be kept secret.
If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court may order that the name, surname and address of such victim
or witness and his or her father's name or his or her identity be kept
secret.
In disclosing the name, surname, address of the person
or his or her father's name having been kept secret pursuant to subsection (1) at the time of hearing of the concerned case or publishing
details pertaining thereto, such disclosure shall be made under fake
name, surname, address or father's name, pursuant to the order of the
court.
184. Deposition, document or deed made or executed before
investigating authority may be recorded in audio-visual means:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the
investigating authority may, in the following circumstance, record, or
cause to be recorded, the deposition, document or deed of a victim of
an offence, informant or witness through any audio-visual means, in
the presence of the government attorney:
If the investigating authority has a reasonable reason to
believe that the accused may, by way of putting undue
influence on, or showing fear, terror, intimidation or
threat to the victim of an offence, the informant or any
witness, prevent such victim, informant or witness from
appearing before the court or compel him or her to make
statement or deposition contrary to the statement or
document which he or she has made or executed before
the investigating authority, in spite of his or her
appearance in the court,
If such person, informant or witness is, owing to
physical infirmity or being a child, not able to appear
before the police office or government attorney office,
If any thing to be submitted to the court as evidence
cannot be taken to the court from the place where that
thing is situated.
The court may admit in evidence the audio-video means
recorded pursuant to sub-section (1).
185. Performance of activities by higher level employee: (1) Any
function or duty that is required to be or may be performed by any
government attorney, police officer or any other officer pursuant to
this Act may also be performed by such government attorney of
higher level or of the same level as designated by the Attorney
General or by such police employee of higher level or of the same
level as designated by the Inspector General of Police or by any
other officer of higher level or of the same level in the concerned
office.
Any function or duty performed pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be deemed to have been performed by the competent
authority.
186. Receipt to be taken or given: (1) While returning any document
registered in the court to any person or handing over any document
by the court to any person, a receipt or proof to the effect that such
document has been so returned or handed over shall be executed or
taken and enclosed in the case-file.
The court shall, while receiving any document
submitted by any person to it, give a receipt thereof to that person.
187. To make assistance in witnessing and giving signature or thumb
impression: (1) If any person is bound to witness any act in the
course of proceedings or affixing signature or thumb impression on a
document prepared by the court pursuant to this Act, such person
shall assist the court by so being witness or affixing signature or
thumb impression on such document.
If any person bound to witness any act or affix signature
or thumb impression on any document pursuant to sub-section (1)
refuses to do so, the employee executing that act or document may
sign and execute such document, by taking signature or thumb
impression of any other two persons present, setting out that matter
and remarks, along with the reason for the failure of such person to
witness or sign the document.
Any document executed pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall be deemed to have been executed in fulfillment of the
requirements specified by law.
If any person bound to affix his or her signature or
thumb impression on any document executed before the court refuses
to do so, the judge shall set out the matter, mention remarks in the
document and sign it.
If any person does not assist the court by omitting to
witness any act or to affix signature or thumb impression on any
document under this Section, the court may fine such person with a
maximum of five thousand rupees.
If any person, when affixing his or her signature or
thumb impression on a document pursuant to this Act, expresses his
or her disagreement over any matter contained in the document, he
or she may affix his or her signature or thumb impression on it,
separately stating his or her remarks.
188. Action not to be instituted: (1) No question shall be raised nor any
case instituted in any court in respect of any decision, prosecution,
pleading and defense made by the government attorney in relation to
any case pursuant to this Act.
No action may be taken in respect of any act done or
action taken in good faith by the investigating authority in relation to
the investigation of any of the offences under Schedule-1 and
Schedule-2.
189. Provision of investigating committee: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the following committee
shall investigate into a complaint filed in relation to the offence
investigated or prosecuted dishonestly as referred to in Section 99 of
the Penal Code:
Joint Attorney General of at least gazetted
first class designated by the Attorney General
-Chairperson
At least gazetted first class officer of the
Government of Nepal, as designated by the
Government of Nepal
-Member
At least gazetted first class officer of the
Nepal
Police,
designated
Government of Nepal
-Member
If, in conducting investigation, the committee referred
to in sub-section (1) finds that such investigation or prosecution has
been conducted or made dishonestly, it shall write to the concerned
government attorney office to institute the case in relation thereto.
190. Power to grant permission to take over case: If, in any case of the
offence under Schedule-4 involving the recovery of any kind of
movable or immovable property, other than a case involving the
recovery of a claimed amount or sentence of imprisonment or fine,
the complainant dies or becomes of unsound mind or goes away and
the time-limit and the date appointed for appearance by the court get
expired, and his or her successor makes a petition for the extension
of the time-limit and appointed date for appearance, within thirtyfive days from the date of his or her death, being of unsound mind or
going away, excluding the time required for journey, the court may
issue an order extending the expired time-limit and appointed date
for appearance.
191. Mutual legal assistance may be effected: If a summons or warrant
for arrest has to be issued to, or any evidence to be taken from, any
offender of a case related to any offence to be proceeded, heard and
adjudicated pursuant to this Act who is in a foreign country or it is
necessary to assist in the service of a summons or warrant for arrest
on, or take any evidence from, any accused of a case sub judice in a
foreign court, who is in Nepal, the matter shall be dealt with in
accordance with the mutual legal assistance law.
192. Documents may be exchanged through electronic means: The
documents referred to in this Act may be exchanged through
electronic means in accordance with the law in force related to
electronic transactions.
193. Not to be affected by printing or mathematical error: If there is
any mathematical or other minor error or omission in writing or
printing in respect of the procedures under this Act, while conducting
investigation, prosecution and other proceeding of a case under this
Act, all acts and proceedings related thereto shall not be deemed
illegal by that reason alone.
194. Coordination committee: (1) There shall be a coordination
committee as follows, in order to bring effectiveness in the
investigation and prosecution of cases of offences under Schedule-1
or Schedule-2, by making coordination, as required, between the
bodies involved in such investigation and prosecution:
Attorney General
-Chairperson
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
-Member
Inspector General of Police, Nepal Police
-Member
Such government attorney of gazetted first
class level or above in the Office of
Attorney General as designated by the
Attorney General
-Member
secretary
The rules of procedures of the coordination committee
shall be as determined by itself.
195. Departmental action to be taken: A public servant who fails to do
act or take any action required to be done or taken pursuant to this
Act within the period, if any, specified by this Act shall be liable to
departmental action in accordance with law.
196. Power to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in
consultation with the Attorney General, frame rules on matters of
investigation, and the Supreme Court may frame rules on matters of
court proceedings, for the implementation of this Act.
While framing rules pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Judicial Council shall be consulted on the matters pertaining to the
administration of justice.
197. Power to frame directives: (1 In order to make acts to be carried
out under this Act simple, clear and well managed, the following
authority may, as required, make and enforce directives on the
following matters:
The Government of Nepal, on the advice of the
Attorney General, in respect of the investigation and
prosecution of cases of offences under Schedule-1 or
Schedule-2,
The Attorney General in respect of the pleading,
defense or legal opinion in relation to the cases related
to offences under Schedule-1 or Schedule-2,
The Supreme Court in respect of the service of
summons under Chapter 6,
The Supreme Court in respect of the management of
court or bench;
The Supreme Court in respect of the execution of
judgments under Chapter 15,
The Government of Nepal, in consultation with the
Attorney General, in respect of the withdrawal of cases
pursuant to Section 116,
The Government of Nepal, in consultation with the
Attorney General, in respect of pardon pursuant to

Section 159,
The Supreme Court in respect of the other court
proceedings.
The directives referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to have been issued under this Act.
198. Power to make alteration in Schedules: The Government of Nepal
may, as required, make any alteration in or addition to or deletion
from the offences set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2, by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette.
Schedule -1
(Relating to clauses (d) and (l) of Section 2)
Offences under the following Chapters or under the following
Sections of the following Chapters of the Penal Code:

Part-2:

Chapter-1

Chapter-2
Sections 92, 93, 94 and 102 of Chapter-4
Sections 1104, 105, 106, 110, 114, 118, 119, 120, 121,
122, 123, 124, 125 and 126

Chapter-6

Chapter-7
Sections 151 and 152 of Chapter-8

Chapter-9

Chapter-10
(10) Chapter-11
(11) Chapter-12
(12) Chapter-13
(13) Section 192 of Chapter-14
(14) Chapter-15
(15) Chapter-16
(16) Chapter-17
(17) Sections 219, 221, 222, 223, 225, sub-section (3) of

Section 226 of Chapter-18
(18) Chapter-19
(19) Chapter-20
(20) Clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 249 and
Sections 249, 250, 251, 252 and 253 of Chapter-21
(21) Chapters-22 and 23
(22) Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of Section
276, and Section 278 of Chapter-25
(23) Sections 283 (except personal property) and 287 of

Chapter-26
(24) Chapter-27
Attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to any offence under serial
number 1 above
Offence relating to human trafficking and transportation
Offence under the Postal Act, 2019
Offence relating to citizenship
Offence relating to ancient monuments
Offence relating to narcotic drugs
Offence under the Essential Services Operation Act, 2014
Offence under Protection and Welfare of the Disabled Act, 2039
Offence under the Act Relating to Secrecy of Documents, 2039
Offence relating to passport
Offence relating to the protection of essential goods
Offence under the Prison Act, 2019
Offence under the Donation Act, 2025
Offence under the Lottery Act, 2025
Causing death of or grievous hurt or injury to any person by running
over, hitting, blowing or accident by motor vehicle
Offence under Section 9A. of the Civil Aviation Act, 2015
Offence under Section 15 of the Press and Publication Act, 2048
Offence of forgery or fraud resulted from any offence included in
this Schedule
Any such other offence as may be specified by the law in force to be
included in this Schedule
Any such offence as may be included in this Schedule by the
Government of Nepal, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette
Schedule-2
(Relating to clauses (d) and (l) of Section 2)
Offences under the following Sections of the following Chapter of
the Penal Code:
Sections 107, 108, 109, 111, 112 and 113 of Chapter-5
of Part-2
Any criminal case, which is instituted with the Government of Nepal
being plaintiff, or any offence of criminal nature in which the right,
interest or concern of the Government of Nepal is vested, except that
mentioned in Schedule-1.
Such offence as may be included by the law in force in this
Schedule.
Such offence as may be specified to be tried and adjudicated under
this Schedule, by the Government of Nepal, by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette.
Offence of attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to, any offence under
numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4, and any offence related thereto under Chapter
Schedule-3
(Relating to clause (l) of Section 2)
Offences under Chapter-3 of Part-2 of the Penal Code.
Any criminal offence in which the Government of Nepal is
concerned or in which the right, interest or concern of any
constitutional body, court or public authority is vested, other than
that set forth in Schedule-1 or Schedule-2.
Schedule-4
(Relating to part (l) of Section 2)
Offences under the following Chapters or under the following
Sections of the following Chapters of the Penal Code:

Part-2:

Chapter-14 except Section 192

Chapter-15
Sections 220, 224, and 226 of Chapter-18 (if a woman
of 18 years of age or above is involved)
Clause (c) of sub-section (3) of Section 249, Sections
250 and 252 of Chapter-21 (if any organization other
than a person or Government of Nepal is plaintiff)

Chapter-25, except clauses (a), (b) and (c) of subsection (3) of Section 276, and Section 277
Sections 284, 286 and 287 of Chapter-26 (if a person is
plaintiff)
Chapters-1 and 2 of Part 3
Any criminal cases other than those mentioned in Schedule-1, 2 or 3.
Any offences of criminal nature which are to be instituted with
persons being plaintiff under the law in force.
Offence of incest.
Offences of attempt to, abetment of, conspiracy to, any offence under
serial numbers 1, 2 and 3 above and any offences related thereto
under Chapter-11.
Schedule-5
(Relating to sub-sections (1) and (7) of Section 4)
Form of First Information Report
Report submitted to ………….
(Name and address of the police office)
To be filled in by the police office:
Registration No.:
Registration date:
Name, surname and address of the person making the first
information report or notice:
Law or case in respect whereof the information report or notice has
been made:
Name, surname and address (including street) of the person who has
committed the offence:
Name of father/mother of the person who has committed the offence:
Special identifying features of the person who has committed the
offence:
Details relating to the offence:
The place, date and time where and when the offence
has been committed or is being committed or going to
be committed:
Details of the event relating to the offence:
Nature of the offence and other details related to the
offence:
Proof, evidence related with the offence:
Other details related to the offence:
The contents of this report are true and correct; if proved false, I
shall bear and pay according to law.
If I receive a notice to appear during investigation into the case by
the police or trial of the case by the court, I shall appear accordingly.
Person making first information report or notice:
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-6
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 4)
Receipt of First Information Report or Notice
Re: Concerning the offence related to--------------.
A report or notice dated--------------made by------------has been received
and entered in the register maintained by this police office on----------
(date).
Seal of the office:
Registration No.:
Report or notice registering police
employee:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:
Office:
Date:
Schedule-7
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 4)
Offence Register
Government of Nepal
Ministry of Home Affairs
……………. Police Office
crime
Designated
investigating
authority
Date, time
and place of
incident
Date and time of
registration of
report
Date and time of
departure and arrival of
police for and on spot
Name,
surname of
informant
Short
description of
the case
Description of
injury or hurt
Name,
surname,
address,
occupation
of victim
surname
father of
accused
suspect
Name,
surname and
description
of accused
or suspect
Details of
accused
arrested
Manner of
commission of
offence
Goods or
instruments
used in the
commission
of offence
Death Hurt Others
Witnesses and
persons in witness of
deed of scene of
crime
Physical material
evidence or exhibits
Proceeding after investigation
Date of
examination
of witness
Judgment passed by court
Appeal made or
not; if yes, date of
Remarks
Date of
submission of
report of
investigation
Proposed opinion
or advice of
investigating
authority
Charge framed by
governmental
attorney and law
pertaining thereto
Limitation
Schedule-8
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 9)
Form of warrant for arrest to be issued with the approval of the court
Mr./Ms.----------------
Address (including street):--------------
Whereas, you have to be arrested in the course of investigation into the
offence of-------------------, this warrant for arrest is hereby issued pursuant
to the approval of the ……court, dated….. You are hereby required to
appear in person immediately, accompanied by the police employee carrying
this warrant for arrest, before--------office. Otherwise, the police will arrest
and produce you before-------office.
Investigating authority's:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:
Office:
Date:
Schedule-9
(Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 9)
Form of Urgent Warrant for Arrest
Mr./Ms.----------------
Address (including street):--------------
Whereas, you have to be arrested in the course of investigation into the
offence of-------------------, this warrant for arrest is hereby issued.
Police employee's:
Name, surname:
Designation:
Date:
Schedule-10
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 13)
Form of Warrant for Detention
Mr/Ms..................
Address............
Whereas, it is required to try the case by holding you in police custody
in the course of investigation into the offence of......, on the
report/information of..............;
Now, therefore, this warrant for detention is hereby issued for holding
you in police custody with effect from this date.
Investigating authority:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:
Office:
Date:
Schedule-11
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 16)
Form of document executed by person seeing, witnessing, hearing or
knowing the incident
Document
executed
by------------(person),
aged------,
carrying
………profession/occupation, son/daughter of-----------, a resident of---------
, before Mr./Ms.---------------investigating authority of-------police office.
Short description of the first information report or notice:
Questions in connection with the incident:
Matters set out by the person executing the document:
Presence:
Signature of the document executing person:
Done on -----------day, --------month of----------of the year-----------.
Schedule-12
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 18)
Form of Notice for Making Search
Whereas, in the case related to the offence of-------------, in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of----------- and ------------ et.
al. is defendant, it is possible that the above-named accused might be
residing or staying in, or hiding any thing, good or instrument used by him
or her in the commission of the offence or connected with the offence in,-----
----(place);
Now, therefore, I hereby give this notice to you to search the said
house, place.
I request for assistance in the above act.
Investigating authority:
Date:
Schedule-13
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 18)
Form of Search/Seizure Deed
Deed of search of thing/place/body of person and seizure of thing
executed at Ward No……, ….Village Body/Municipality--------(place)
by the Police Office--------------.
Short description of the first information report or notice:
If it is required to make a prior search of the authority or employee
making search or seizure, details of such prior search made:
Description and boundaries of the place where the thing/ place/person
has been searched or seized:
Description of the seized thing or exhibit related to the offence:
Name, surname, age, address and signature of every eye witness:
Name, surname, age, address and signature of the person in whose
presence the deed is executed:
The owner or person in charge of the house or thing, a
resident
of-------Ward
No….,
…….Village
Body/Municipality, ……….District, signing it covenanting
that the investigating authority has offered himself or herself
to be searched before making search of my body, my house
and thing, and that he or she has made search with dignity
and no goods in the house have been misappropriated.
Name, surname, age, address and signature of the informant:
Name, surname, age, address and signature of the accused
person:
The investigating authority deputed to execute the act including
search, seizure:
Other employees:
Date:
Time:
Schedule-14
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 20)
Deed on Scene of Crime/Corpse Examination
Deed on scene of crime/corpse examination executed in------------- (place)
by the police office----------------
Name, surname, description of the deceased:
Address:
Short description of the report or notice:
Description and boundaries of the scene of crime:
Description of the corpse:
Physical condition of the corpse: (mention the details)
Description of the corpse:
Clothes- (including other physical materials on the body)
Height
Color of hair
Condition of hair
Condition of face
Eyes: Open/closed
Mouth
Teeth and tongue
Condition of throat
Hands: Stretched or not
Condition of nail
Condition of legs
Other conditions
Bruises:
(Site, size and measurement)
Abrasion:
(Site, size and measurement)
Cut wounds:
(Site, size)
Throat abrasion:
Other sites (Site, size and measurement)
Chest
Condition of the other parts of stomach
Penis, vagina
Identifying marks, if any:
Other deformities/unusual symptoms, if any:
Sketch of the scene of crime and the corpse (if it can be made):
Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of eye witnesses:
Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of persons in whose
presence the deed is executed:
Name, surname, age, address and signature of the informant:
Names, surnames, ages, addresses and signatures of the accused
persons:
Served by:
Investigating authority:
Other police employees:
Date:
Schedule-15
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 20)
Autopsy Report
Case registration number:
Police office sending for autopsy (letter date and reference
number):
Name of the deceased:
Address:
Gender:
Age, date of birth:
Dead body identified by:
Name of the accompanying police personnel:
Date and time of death:
Date and hour of receipt of inquest papers and dead body:
Date and hour of starting autopsy:
Date and hour of concluding autopsy:
Name of the experts conducting autopsy:
a. …………….
c.…………….
b. ……………..
d.………………
Name of the Hospital:
Relevant details (mention brief history of the case regarding
circumstances of death and other sources of information):
External Examination (general observation of the dead body):
(1) Height (2) Weight (3) Physique:
(4) Hairs
(5) Clothes and conditions:
Special identifying features (Huliya):
Post mortem changes present:
Rigor mortis:
Livor mortis:
Algor mortis/cooling:
Different signs of decomposition:
Natural orifices:
Mouth
Vagina/penis
Urethra
Injuries: Name, size, and site (Ante mortem/post
mortem/old/fresh)
INTERNAL EXAMINATION
Head and Neck:
Scalp, skull:
Brain and vessels:
Orbital, nasal and aural cavities:
Mouth, tongue:
Neck (larynx, thyroid and other neck structure:
Other relevant details
Chest (Thorax)
Ribs and chest wall:
Diaphragm:
Oesophagus:
Trachea and bronchi:
Pleural activities:
Lungs:
Heart and pericardial sac (any content in pericardial sac,
condition of three coronary arteries, valves and chambers
and myocardium must be observed):
Abdomen
Peritoneal and pelvic cavity:
Stomach intestine:
Small intestine:
Large intestine:
Liver, gall bladder, pancreas:
Spleen:
Kidney, renal pelvis:
Genital organs:
Urinary bladder and urethra:
Spinal Column:
Specimen collected for analysis (mention preservative also):
Toxicology:
Stomach with contents:
Part of liver:
Kidney:
Blood:
Others, if any:
Histopathology:
Others (specify):
Special Examination: (Procedures like neck dissection, pelvic
dissection, flotation test of lungs etc. must be done in relevant
cases and findings should be documented):
Items handed over (when and who received?)
Autopsy report:
Viscera and other samples:
Clothes and other articles:
Opinion or conclusion
Opinion or cause of death:
(Mention cause of death in Nepali language also)
Opinion on time since death:
Opinion on probable type of objects or weapon causing
injuries:
Opinion on live birth or still birth:
Other opinion, if any:
Signature of Medical Officer/Expert
Signature:
Date:
Signature:
Date:
Signature:
Date:
Name:
Special qualification:
Training
experience:
NMC Reg. No.
Name:
Special
qualification:
Training
experience:
NMC Reg. No.
Name:
Special
qualification:
Training
experience:
NMC Reg. No.
Seal of the Hospital:
Date:
Note bene:
Post mortem shall be conducted by a forensic expert, to the
extent possible, and by a trained doctor if such expert is not
available.
The report shall be prepared by the autopsy conducting expert
or doctor himself or herself.
The report shall be computer typed to the extent possible, if not
so, be prepared in a legible manner. In addition, the original of
the autopsy report shall be attached.
If the specified space is not enough to contain the details,
details shall also be set down in a separate sheet as well.
Schedule-16
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 22)
Injury Examination Report
(It is used in case of examination of detainee also)
Case registration number:
Name of the office referred for injury examination (with letter ref.
No. and Date):
Name, age, date of birth and sex of the injured person:
Address:
Name of the accompanying police personnel:
Name of the Hospital/Health Center:
Date, time and place of examination:
Identification mark of the examinee:
Consent for examination taken from:
Injured person
Family member or others
10. Brief history about the incident (how and when the injuries were
produced?)
11. Medical history of the examinee:
12. General physique and vitals:
Height:
Weight
Pulse
Temperature
Respiratory Rate
Degree of consciousness:
13. Injuries (name, size, site, color, surrounding area, signs of treatment,
bleeding, marks, signs of healings, any imprints and content etc.):
A. Type of injury:
a. Simple:
b. Grievous:
c. Severe:
d. Other remarks:
B. Type of weapon/object used:
a. Blunt force
b. Sharp force
c. Pointed objects
d. Projectile
e. Heat
f. Chemical
g. Others (specify)
C. Condition of the patient at the time of examination:
D. Severity (explain the severity in terms of existing condition
and possible complication):
E. Investigation and reports (for example X-ray, USG, Blood,
Urine etc.):
F. Treatment provided (briefly):
G. Referral (Where and Why?):
H. Follow up (if necessary):
I. Re-examination (whether case needs information about
grade of disability:
Opinion: (Condition of examinee, severity of the injury, age of
the injury and possible causative objects should be considered
to frame opinion)
Name of the Examiner:
Signature:
Qualification: MC/NHPC
Reg. No.:
Office/Hospital/Health Center:
Date:
Seal of the Hospital/Health Center:
Note bene:
Injury examination shall be conducted by a forensic expert, to
the extent possible, and by a trained doctor if such expert is not
available.
The report shall be prepared by the injury examination
conducting expert or doctor himself or herself.
The report shall be computer typed to the extent possible, if not
so, be prepared in a legible manner. In addition, the original of
the autopsy report shall be attached.
If the specified space is not enough to contain the details,
details shall also be set down in a separate sheet as well.
Schdule-17
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 24)
Form of Identification of Person
Deed of identification executed by the police office…….
I,………………….,
being
present
scene
crime
of………..committed by ……….., son of………………., a resident of Ward
No.…….., ………….Village Body/Municipality, ……….District………,
on……………..(date),
being
called
police
office………….to identify the offender whom I saw while committing the
offence, have appeared in this court today. As I saw the following persons
and noticed their color and appearance at the time of the commission of that
incident, I hereby identify the said person as the same person/as not the same
person because I did not see him or her or his or her color and appearance is
different.
Name, surname and address of the identifying person:
Place of identification made:
Name, surname, address and designation of the identifying executing
authority:
Date of identification made:
Schedule-18
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 25
Police Diary
1. Name of investigating authority:
2. Date appointed for conducting investigation:
3. Name of the case:
4. Name of the plaintiff/defendant:
5. Description related to investigation:
(a) Time and date of receipt of information of the offence, and
short description thereof:
(b) Description of visits made by the investigating authority in the
course of investigation:
Place
Works
performed by
him or her
Exhibits,
proof and
Evidence
received
If someone
is arrested,
description
thereof
Name, address
of the
person
inquired by
him or her and
matters stated
by such person
in relation to
the offence
Signature
Remarks
Schedule-19
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 31)
Investigation Report
Case No:..........
Date of filing:.........
Up to ..........
Date and time of receipt of information or complaint of
offence:.......................
Name and designation of investigating authority ..........................
Name and address of the informant..................................
Short description of the first information report or notice
...............................
Place, time and date where and when the offence was committed
.......................................
Time and date of the identification of the victim of the offence
committed .................
Place, time and date where and when the offender was arrested
.............................................
Name, surname, age and address (including street) of offender (if
more than one offender, write the names of all offenders
serially).......................
Name, surname and address of the offender's father, mother………..
Short description of the statement made by the accused before the
competent authority..................................
Place
where
goods
related
offence
found
.....................................
Name, surname, age and address of the victim of the offence
....................
Clear description and sketch of the scene of crime...........................
Instruments or arms used in the commission of the offence
........................
Cause of incident and motive of the offender:...............
Proposal opinion and punishment claimed by the investigation
officer:.........................
If compensation is caused to be recovered, description of who is
entitled to recover how much compensation: .....................
Names, surnames and addresses of witnesses who know about the
offence; and short description of the deed made by them before the
investigating authority :..........................
Physical
proof
evidence
related
offence:
:......................................
If any other things are to be mentioned, description thereof:
Serial description of the documents....................................
Schedule-20
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 32)
Form of Charge Sheet
To be filled in by the court:
Registration No:
Registration date:
A Charge Sheet
filed under Section 20 of Chapter-3 of the National Criminal Procedure
(Code) Act, 2017
in ....................... court
No.... of the year......
Government of Nepal, on the report of......................
Plaintiff
Versus
.............................................................
Defendant
............................................................
.............................................................
Case:
Description of the case:
Charge against the accused:
Details of legal provision related to the charge:
Sentence to be awarded to the accused:
Where the accused has confessed the offence, description thereof and
proposed reduction in punishment for such confession:
Proof, evidence:
Proof, evidence and thing related to the offence:
Witness:
Eye-witness:
If compensation is caused to be provided to the person who has sustained
injury from the offence, the claim for compensation:
Exhibits or other goods or things connected with the offence and can be
admissible in evidence:
Documents presented:
It is humbly prayed that the court institute proceedings based on this charge
sheet.
Seal of office:
Government attorney's:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:
Office:
Date:
Note bene:
While framing a charge sheet, it should be so framed that the matters
required to be set down pursuant to Section 32 of Chapter-3 of this
Act are also set down.
The names, surnames, addresses of all offenders should be mentioned
in the versus column in serial order.
The available proof, evidence and document should be set down
serially in the above form.
Schedule-21
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 53)
Form of Complaint
To be filled in by the court:
Registration No.:
Registration Date:
A Complaint
filed in ................under Section........of Chapter.........of the National
Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017
Criminal case-file number ........of the year.....
......................,aged..............,a resident of.........................Complainant
Versus
......................,aged..............,a resident of..........................Offender
Case: .............
The description of the offence committed by the said offender is as follows.
I humbly pray that the proceedings of case be instituted against him or her.
Description of the offence:..........................
Charge made against the offender................
Related law:...........
Sentence to be imposed on the offender: ..............
Injury caused from the offence and amount recoverable from the
offender:
Where the accused has confessed the offence, description thereof and
proposed remission of punishment for such confession:
Other necessary matters:
Evidence
Witness:
(Full name, age and address of the witness)
Documents:
Exhibits:
Complainant:
.....aged....., son/daughter/wife of.......,
a resident of.........born in..........
Date:
Schedule-22
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 57)
Notice for appearance in pursuance of the warrant for arrest
Notice issued by.....................court
Whereas, on the report/information of ......................, a charge sheet has been
filed in the case of............. (state the offence) in which the Government of
Nepal is plaintiff and you/you et al................are defendant;
Now, therefore, the warrant for arrest issued against you is herewith
forwarded. You are hereby required to appear in person in pursuance of this
warrant for arrest.
Seal of court
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
Schedule-23
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 58)
Form of warrant for arrest to be issued by the court against the
offender
Notice issued by ……………
court
Whereas, on the report or information of ......................, a charge sheet has
been filed in the case of............. (state the offence) in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff and you/you et al................are defendant;
Now, therefore, the warrant for arrest is issued to you. You are hereby
informed to appear in pursuance of this warrant for arrest.
Seal of court
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
Schedule-24
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 58)
Form of warrant for arrest to be issued by the court in the name of
witness and other person
A warrant for arrest issued by.............court in the name of the accused
......................
(Name of the officer or office)
Whereas, the proceedings of the case have been instituted in this court,
against……………….. (name and address of the person to be arrested), on
the charge of…………….(offence), you are hereby directed to arrest the
said person and produce him or her before this court within seven days,
excluding the time required for journey. In the event of the failure to
produce the said person within the said period, you are required to serve this
warrant for arrest and the notice sent along with it on the eighth day and give
information thereof to this court, and to keep on searching the person to be
arrested, arrest him or her wherever found and produce him or her before
this court.
The concerned authority's signature:
Date:
Seal of the court:
Schedule-25
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 58)
35-day warrant for arrest issued by the court
Whereas, in the case of...............(state the offence) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the information report of ...................... and you/you
et al................are defendant, a warrant for arrest has been issued for
arresting you but you have not been arrested;
Now, therefore, this 35-day warrant for arrest has also been posted. If you
voluntarily appear or are arrested and produced before this court within
thirty-five days excluding the time required for journey, you shall be heard
and tried in accordance with law. If you remain absconding thereby expiring
the time-limit, the case shall be tried in accordance with law; and you shall
not be entitled to make a complaint subsequently.
Date:
Seal of court:
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
Schedule-26
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 59)
Form of summons issued in the name of accused
A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............
Whereas, a charge sheet has been filed in this court against you on the
charge
of.........(offence)
matter
shall
heard
on................day.................date..............month...............year;
No, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this court. If you fail to
appear on that day, a warrant shall be issued to arrest you, and action shall
be instituted in accordance with the law. The complaint against you is
attached herewith.
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
(Copies of documents attached)
1............................
2. ...........................
3. ...........................
4. ...........................
(Seal of the court)
Date: .............
Schedule-27
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 59)
Form of summons to be issued in individual criminal case
A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............
Whereas, a complaint has been filed in this court against you on the charge
of.........(offence);
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby issued to you. You are hereby
required to appear in this court within thirty days after the issuance of this
summons. You are hereby informed that if you fail to appear within the said
period, action shall be instituted in accordance with the law.
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
(Copies of documents attached)
1............................
2. ...........................
3. ...........................
4. ...........................
(Seal of the court)
Date: .............
Schedule-28
(Relating to Section 60)
Form of summons issued in the name of witness
A summons issued by............in the name of................a resident of............
Whereas, it is required to examine you on the matter of the case of............in
which ..................is plaintiff and ..............is defendant;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this court at.......o'clock
in the morning on the------day of the month of..........the year........ If you fail
to appear, the matter shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
Concerned authority's:
Signature:
(Seal of the court)
Date: ............
Schedule-29
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 74)
Form of deed to be executed by person furnishing bail/bond
Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
bail/bond of…………… has been demanded by the order of the
………..court dated…………;
Now, therefore, I have made this petition for permission to furnish a
bail/bond of …………….rupees in cash or of the following property. I shall
appear at all times as and when the court so specifies, and if I fail to do so, I
hereby agree to the forfeiture of the bail/bond to the extent the sum of
money payable by me.
Name, surname and address of the person furnishing bail/bond:
Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
Description of the property:………
Schedule-30
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 74)
Form of deed to be executed by person furnishing property as
guarantee
Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
guarantee of…………… has been demanded by the order of the
………..court dated…………;
Now, therefore, I have made this petition for permission to furnish a
guarantee of …………….rupees in cash or of the following property. I shall
appear at all times as and when the court so specifies, and if I fail to do so, I
hereby agree to the forfeiture of the guarantee to the extent the sum of
money payable by me or the sentence imposed on me.
Name, surname and address of the person furnishing guarantee:
Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
Description of the property:………
Schedule-31
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 73)
Form of deed to be executed if other person than the accused/defendant
furnishes guarantee
Whereas, in the case of…………(of the year……) in which the Government
of Nepal is plaintiff on the report of..............and …………(defendant), a
guarantee of…………… has been demanded from him/her, by the order of
the ………..court dated…………, and I…………………..being agreed to
furnish a sum of…………rupees in cash or the following property as the
guarantee in his or her favor;
Now, therefore, I hereby appear to furnish the guarantee. I hereby covenant
that I shall cause him or her (the accused/defendant) to appear at the time
appointed by the court; and in the case of my default, I hereby agree to the
recovery of the sentence imposable on, or any amount payable by, him or
her from the said guarantee or any other property.
Name, surname and address of the guarantor/surety:
Name, surname and address of father and grand-father:
Description of the property:………
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-32
(Relating to Section 80)
Form of Warrant for Detention
Mr/Ms..................
Address............
Whereas, it is required to try the case by holding you in police custody in the
course of the offence of …………….., in which the Government of Nepal is
plaintiff on report of.............., and you, et.al, are defendant;
Now, therefore, this warrant for detention is hereby issued for holding you in
police custody with effect from this date.
The concerned authority:
Signature:
Name:
Designation:
Office:
Date:
Schedule-33
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 82)
Form of Book of Appointed Date for Appearance
Book of appointed date for appearance maintained by the ..............
Year........
Month,
date, day
Case Name of the
complainant,
appellant or
applicant
Name of the
accused or
respondent
Purpose for
which date for
appearance is
appointed
Remarks
Signature:
Schedule-34
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 82)
Form of Acknowledgment of Appointed Date for Appearance
Book of appointed date for appearance maintained by the ..............
Year........
Plaintiff
Defendant
Case:
Date:
Whereas, the case will be enlisted in the cause list for final hearing/
…………..proceeding will be conducted on……..(date);
Now, therefore, I hereby sign binding myself to appear in this court/office
at………hours, on the……..day of the month of …….of the year 20…….
Plaintiff…..
Defendant….
Schedule-35
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 83)
Form of Memorandum of Appointed Date for Appearance
Memorandum of appointed date for appearance issued by...............in
the name of................
Case......................year....................No.................
Versus..................
Whereas, the date of ........has been appointed as the date for appearance for
the purpose of ................;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear at........o'clock on the said
Signature of the employee appointing the due date.
Whereas, the date of ........has been appointed as the date for appearance for
the purpose of ................;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear at........o'clock on the said
Signature of the employee appointing date for appearance.
Schedule-36
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 89)
Form of Power of Attorney
I have appointed Mr./Ms. .......................as my attorney to carry out the act
of.....................on my behalf, in the case of.......... with................ He or she
does not suffer any disqualification for being an attorney.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
………(Citizenship No.)
I hereby consent to act as an attorney of Mr./Ms. ..............., a resident
of..............., as mentioned above. I shall perform the said act with honesty. I
do not suffer any disqualification for being an attorney.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
………(Citizenship No.)
It is true and correct that this power of attorney has been drawn up and
signed in our presence.
Witnesses:
Writer witness, age of ......years, a resident of..................
Thumb impressions:
Signature:
Right
Writer witness, age of ......years, a resident of..................
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
Schedule-37
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 106)
Form of oath to be taken by witness
I............hereby take an oath in the name of the God/ swear with truth and
honesty that in the case of...............versus............, I shall give true statement
of whatever I have seen, known and heard; that I shall not conceal or lie any
matter; and that I shall give true answers to all questions asked by the court
and by or on behalf of the parties to the case, to the extent of whatever I
have seen, known and heard.
Signature of oath taking person:
Signature of oath administering person:
Schedule-38
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 106)
Form of taking deposition of witness
Case................
Number............of the year.........
Versus..........
Deposition of witness...................
Questions and answers of the questions
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:
Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.
Schedule-39
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 107)
Form of Commission
A commission sent by...............
Case.............
of the year.....
Date......................
Complainant..................
Accused.......................
Deposition of witness...............
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Signature of parties:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:
Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.
Schedule-40
(Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 109)
Form of deed of record of examination of witness through video
conference
We, the undersigned, hereby covenant that it is true and correct that, in the
case of………….in which …………….is plaintiff and ……….is defendant,
being …………, the witness of the plaintiff/defendant, unable to appear in
the court, the said witness was examined in our presence through video
conference by the order of the …….court dated………
In presence of:
Name, surname and signature of the Local Level member or representative:
Name, surname and signature of the local person:
Name, surname and signature of the witness:
Name, surname and signature of the employee deputed by the court:
Name, surname and signature of the technical employee:
Name, surname and signature of the plaintiff, defendant or his or her
attorney:
Name, surname and signature of the legal practitioner of the
plaintiff/defendant, if any:
Place:
Date:
Schedule-41
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 115)
Form of commission to be used for examination of witness abroad
A commission sent by...............
In the case............. (plaintiff) and …….(defendant)
In the name of the witness……….., residing in ……..(country)
of the year.....
Date......................
Complainant..................
Accused.......................
Deposition of witness...............
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Name of the country where commission was executed:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the authority taking deposition:
Note: The questions and answers thereof shall be recorded on the same order
as examined, cross-examined or re-examined by the parties to the case; and
if the court has asked the witness any question at the beginning, in the
meanwhile or at the end, that question and the answer thereof shall also be
set down according to the serial order.
Schedule-42
(Relating to sub-section (8) of Section 122)
Form of statement of defense
To be filled by the court
Registration No.:
Registration Date.:
Submitted to:
Form of statement of defense
Criminal case file number...........of the year......
Accused................, age of ......years, a resident of .........
Versus
Complainant, .................., age of ......years, a resident of .........
Case:...............
In connection with the charge made against me by the said complainant, my
statements or pleas are as follows:
1...................................
2...................................
3..................................
Evidence
1...................................
2...................................
3..................................
Documents
1...................................
2...................................
Mr./Ms. .............. age of ......years, son/daughter/wife of Mr./Ms............
Date:
Signature/thumb impressions of the accused:
Schedule-43
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 131)
Form of Judgment
...........Court
Branch of...........
Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
..........................................
Versus
......................................
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the complaint)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the deposition of the accused or statement of defense)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(The matters to be decided by the court)
4.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
5.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Punishment sentenced to the party or witness)
6.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Other necessary matters)
Date:
Signature of the judge:
Schedule-44
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 132)
Form of notice of judgment
By...........
Notice of judgment
Notice of judgment given to ...............(full name and address of the party)
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
..........................................
Versus
......................................
Whereas, judgment (main contents of the decision) has been passed by this
court in the aforesaid case...............on (date);
Now, therefore, a notice of the judgment is hereby given to you.
(Seal of the court)
Signature of authority sending the notice:
Date:
Schedule-45
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 136)
Form of memorandum of appeal
To be filled by the court
Registration No.:
Registration Date.:
Submitted to:
Memorandum of appeal
First/second appeal number...........of the year......
................, age of ......years, a resident of ........
Appellant/complainant/accused
Versus
.................., age of ......years, a resident of .........
Respondent/complainant/accused
Case:...............
Whereas, the..........................has passed judgment in the aforesaid
case..............awarding punishment of.......... to me/us and ordering the
recovery of the claimed amount or compensation from me/us;
Now, therefore, I/we have made this appeal on the matters with which
I/we am/are not satisfied, by serving the sentence awarded by the judgment/
furnishing a bail/bond/guarantee for the same. My/our statements are as
follows:
1................
2................
3................
4................
The appellant's:
Signature or thumb impression:
Date:
Name:
Date:
Schedule-46
(Relating to sub-section (6) of Section 140)
Form of Counterclaim
To be filled by the court
Registration No.:
Registration Date:
Submitted to:
Counterclaim
First/second appeal number...........of the year......
................, age of ......years, a resident of .......
Respondent/complainant/accused
Versus
.................., age of ......years, a resident of .........
Appellant/complainant/accused
Case:...............
Whereas, I/we have got a notice from the ………court in the said case to
submit a counterclaim;
Now, therefore, I/we have submitted this counterclaim. My/our statements
are as follows:
1................
2................
3................
4................
Respondent's:
Date:
Name:
Address:
Signature or thumb impression:
Schedule-47
(Relating to Section 150)
Form of Appellate Judgment
...........Court
Branch of...........
Appellate Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
..........................(full name, surname and address of the appellant)
Versus
..........................(full name, surname and address of the respondent)
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the appellant)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the respondent)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the judgment from which appeal has been made)
4.........................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................
(The matters to be decided by the court)
5.........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................
(Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
Date:
Signature of the judge:
Schedule-48
(Relating to Section 150)
Form of Reference Judgment
...........Court
Branch of...........
Reference Judgment
Case..............Number...............of the year....................
..........................................
Versus
......................................
1.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the complaint)
2.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Main points of the deposition of the accused/statement of defense)
3.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(The matters to be decided by the court)
4.........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
(Judgment of the court making the reference for sanction)
5.........................................................................................................................
........................................................................................................................
(Decision of the court along with the reasons for the same)
Date:
Signature of the judge:
Schedule-49
(Related to sub-section (4) of Section 151)
Form of order for arrest in pursuance of judgment
Order
issued by.........
Directed to the police office..........
Whereas, the punishment of .............has been sentenced by the judgment of
this court dated...............to Mr./Ms......................, a resident of .................;
and the said person has absconded;
Now, therefore, it is hereby ordered that the said person be arrested as soon
as possible and handed over to the prison office................
Date.....
Signature of the judge:
Seal of the court:
Schedule-50
(Relating to Section 171)
Form of index of documents
.............................................versus.......................................
Case:
Case-file number.........of year........
Serial
number of
documents
Short
description of
documents
Name of
parties
submitting
documents
Date of
submission of
documents
Signature of
employee
Signature of preparer:
Signature of certifier:

===== SOURCE: National-Human-Rights-Commission-Act(2068).pdf =====

National Human Rights Commission Act, 2068
(2012)
Date of Publication
2068.10.7 (21 Jan. 2012)
Act No. 14 of 2068 (2012)
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions with regard
to the functions, duties, powers and procedures of the National Human
Rights Commission to ensure the respect, protection and promotion as well
as effective implementation of human rights,
Now, therefore, be it in enacted by Constituent Assembly in the
capacity of the the Legislature Parliament pursuant to Article 83 of the
Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2063.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Act shall be called
the "National Human Rights Commission Act, 2068."
(2) This Act shall come into immediately.
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this
Act:-
"Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission.
"Commission" means the National Human Rights Commission
established in accordance with Article 131 of the Constitution.
"Complaint" means a petition or complaint regarding the
violation of human rights or abetment thereof submitted to the
Commission and the term also includes the information
received by the Commission on the matter through any other
source.
"Employee" means an employee of the Commission.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as
prescribed in the Rules formulated under this Act.
"Human Rights" means rights related to life, liberty, equality
and dignity of a person provided by the Constitution and other
prevailing laws and this term also includes the rights contained
in the international treaties regarding human rights to which
Nepal is a party.
"Secretary" means the Secretary of the Commission.
"Member" means a member of the Commission and this
term also includes the Chairperson,
"Constitution" means the Interim Constitution of Nepal,
2063 (2007)

Chapter - 2
The meetings, functions, duties and powers of the
Commission
Meeting of the Commission: (1) The commission shall meet at
least twice a month.
(2) The meeting of the Commission shall be held on such
date, time and venue as prescribed by the Chairperson.
(3) As directed by the Chairperson, generally the Secretary
shall have to inform the members in writing at least Twenty Four
hours in advance of the meeting citing the date, time, venue and
agenda of the meeting of the Commission.
(4) If a majority of the existing number of members of the
Commission are present in the meeting, it shall be deemed to
constitute a quorum for the meeting.
(5) The Chairperson shall chair the meeting of the
Commission and in his/her absence the senior-most member shall
chair the meeting.
(6) The decisions of the Commission shall be made by a
majority of the members present in the meeting and in case of a tie;
the person chairing the meeting shall give a casting vote.
(8) The Secretary shall authenticate the decisions of the
meeting of the Commission.
(9) Other procedures related to the meetings shall be as
determined by the Commission.
Functions, Duties and Powers: (1) In addition to the functions,
duties and powers as returned to in Article 132 of the Constitution,
other functions, duties and powers of the Commission shall be as
follows : -
To conduct or to cause to conduct inspections
and monitoring of prisons, other agencies of the
Government of Nepal, public institutions or
private institutions or any other place for the
protection of human rights, and to provide
necessary suggestions or directives to the agency
concerned with regard to the improvement to be
made in such agency, institution or place for the
protection of human rights,
To conduct investigations with the permission of
the court concerned in any sub-judice case in
which claims involving human rights violation
have been made,
To monitor the implementation status of the
prevailing laws regarding human rights and
recommend to the Government of Nepal for
effective implementation thereof,
To undertake study and research into various
aspects of protection, promotion, enhancement
and implementation of human rights,
To recommend to concerned institution for
including human rights education oriented subject
matter related into the syllabus of school and
university,
To review the existing state of human rights and
make public reports to that effect,
To carry out or cause to be carried out other
activities as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate for the protection and promotion,
enhancement of human rights.
(2) The Commission shall be independent and autonomous in
fulfilling the work of ensuring respect, protection and promotion of
human rights.
May Draw Attention: (1) The Commission may draw attention
of any agency or official, as may be necessary to any matter related
to the protection and promotion of human rights.
(2) In case attention is drawn pursuant to Sub-section (1) by
the Commission, the agency or official concerned shall have to take
necessary action accordingly and inform the same to the Commission.
Commission May Provide Opinion or Consultations: (1) The
Government of Nepal, regarding the matters in which it is obliged to
submit a report to the concerned authority under the International
Treaty related to Human Rights, shall have to write to the
Commission for Opinion before forwarding the report.
(2) If the request for Opinion in writing is received
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission shall have to provide
Opinion to the Government of Nepal on the matter as soon as
possible.
(3) If the Government of Nepal seeks consultations from the
Commission regarding the formulation of any legislation or the
amendment of any existing legislation regarding Human Rights, the
Commission may provide Opinion to the Government of Nepal on the
matter.
(4) The Commission may make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal to formulate new legislations or to make
amendments in any existing legislation or to become a party to any
International or Regional Convention regarding Human Rights.
(5) If the Government of Nepal seeks consultations from the
Commission regarding becoming a party to any International or
Regional Treaty (convention) related to Human Rights, the
Commission may provide Opinion to the Government of Nepal on the
matter.
To Make Names Public and Keep their Record: (1) The
Commission may make public names of officials, persons or agencies
that do not knowingly implement or observe the recommendations or
orders or directives made by the Commission with regard to
violations of human rights as Human Rights Violators.
(2) Prior to making public the names pursuant to Sub-section
(1), the Commission shall have to write to officials, persons or
agencies stating that they did not observe or implement the
Commission's recommendations, orders or directives, giving a
Fifteen-days timeline to such officials, persons or agencies to submit
clarifications.
(3) In case such officials, persons or agencies do not submit
clarifications within the stipulated timeline after receiving in
writing pursuant to Sub-section (2) or in case the clarifications do
not seem to be reasonable, the Commission may make public the
names of such officials, persons or agencies as referred to in Subsection (1).
(4) The Commission shall keep the records of the names of
such officials, persons or agencies whose names have been made
public pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(5) While recommending a person whose name has been made
public pursuant to Sub-section (1) for appointment, promotion and
career development in any public post, the concerned agency may take
the records maintained pursuant to Sub-section (4) as a basis.
(6) While assigning new responsibility to an official whose
name has been made public pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
concerned agency may take the records maintained pursuant to Subsection (4) as a basis in relation to his/her capability (competence).
May Constitute a Committee or Taskforce:
Commission may from a committee or taskforce as it requires, for
execution of its function.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the committee or
taskforce formed pursuant to Sub Section (1) and the facilities of
the members of such committee or taskforce shall be as
determined by the Commission.
(3) The committee or taskforce formed pursuant to Sub-section
(1), after completing the task assigned by the Commission, shall have
to furnish a report to the Commission on the task which it has
completed.
(4) The Commission, if it finds appropriate, may dissolve the
committee or taskforce formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) at any
time.
Provision regarding Interim Relief and Rescue: (1) In case the
Commission deems that if the victim is not provided relief or is not
rescued immediately, it may cause further damage to him/her, the
Commission may issue an order in the name of the agency
concerned to immediately make interim relief available to the victim
or to rescue such victim.
(2) The concerned agency shall have to provide relief to the
victim immediately after the Commission issues an order.
(3) If such relief is made available in cash, the concern person
or agency shall recover such amount from human rights violators as
prescribed.
(4) The Commission may request any institution, organization
or persons for cooperation to make available interim relief to the
victims or to rescue the victims.
(5) Other arrangements with regard to interim relief and rescue
shall be as prescribed.

Chapter - 3
Procedures Relating to Complaint Proceedings
Complaint may be Lodged: (1) In case of violation of human
rights or abetment thereof, the victim himself or herself or anyone
on behalf of him or her, may lodge a complaint as prescribed by the
Commission.
(2) In case a complaint is received pursuant to Sub-section (1),
the Commission shall have to provide a receipt of the registration to
the complainant after registering such complaint in the registration
book.
(3) In case information on human rights violation or abetment
thereof is received through verbal means or through any other means,
such information shall have to be registered in the registration book
pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing laws,
no fee shall be charged for any complaint lodged pursuant to Subsection (1) or information provided pursuant to Sub-section (3).
(5) Complaints regarding the incidents of human rights
violation or its abetment shall have to be lodged at the Commission
within Six months from the date on which the incident took place or
within Six months from the date on which a person, under control of
someone else, got released and became public.
Preliminary
proceedings
complaint:
Commission shall have to initiate preliminary proceedings
immediately as prescribed as soon as a complaint regarding the
incidents of human rights violation or abetment thereof is received
as referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section 10 or information
pursuant to Sub-section (3) is received or if the Commission
deems it appropriate to investigate into the matter on its own
discretion.
(2) While taking an action in accordance with Sub-section
(1), if the Commission finds prima facie that the human rights of any
individual is being violated or abetted, it may issue appropriate orders
in the name of concerned agency or official to immediately stop such
Inquiry and Investigation into Complaints: (1) If there seems, a
situation where human rights of any individual has been or may be
violated or abetted, from the preliminary proceedings pursuant to
Sub-section (1) of Section 11, the Commission may itself or after
appointing investigation team or investigation officer pursuant to
necessity conduct or cause to conduct inquiry or investigation as
prescribed.
(2) After completing inquiry and investigation pursuant to Subsection (1), the investigation team or investigation officer shall have to
submit a report thereof to the Commission.
(3) After receiving the report as referred to in Sub-section
(2), the Commission may seek services of the expert, collect further
evidence or summon witnesses or conduct public hearings as
prescribed.
(4) Other provisions regarding Inquiry and Investigations shall
be as prescribed.
Complaint may be Repealed or Put on Hold: (1) If the
complaint or information received to the Commission or the matters
investigated by the Commission on its own discretion seems baseless
or does not seem to fall under the jurisdiction of the Commission, the
Commission may dismiss or (tameli) such complaint, information or
matter with reasons thereof at any time.
(2) In case of the complaint is dismissed or put on hold
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission shall have to inform
the concerned individual of the same within fifteen days.
Provided that, it shall not binding to the commission to give
information regarding the false complaint
Provisions Relating to Reconciliation: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if the concerned parties
lodge a joint petition for reconciliation in respect of any complaint
that is under consideration in the Commission, the Commission
may have them reconciled as prescribed.
Provided that, regarding the matters which are considered as
serious violation of human rights and humanitarian law under the
international laws or regarding the matters in which reconciliation
(milapatra) cannot take place in accordance with the prevailing laws,
no reconciliation shall take place in accordance with this Section.
(2) It shall be the duty of the parties concerned to abide by
the reconciliation reached pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) Once the reconciliation is reached regarding any
complaint as referred to in Sub-section (1), proceedings thereof
shall be considered to have ended and complaints cannot be lodged
again on such matters.
(4) Other provisions regarding reconciliation shall be as
prescribed.
Decisions to be made: The Commission shall, on the basis of the
evidences acquired through inquiry and investigation with regard to
the complaint or information received by the Commission or the
matter on which it initiated action at its own discretion, make
decisions, generally within six months from the date of complaint
citing the grounds and reasons of whether or not human rights
violation or its abetment has taken place.
Provided that, it shall cause no hindrance to decide the case upon
showing reasons thereof if the case can not be decided within Six months.
Provision regarding Compensation: (1) If it seems necessary to
provide compensation to the victim from the inquiry and
investigation launched pursuant to Section 12, the Commission shall
have to make a decision citing the same while making a decision
pursuant to Section 15.
(2) The type, quantum or amount of compensation shall be
determined in the decision taken pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The Commission may, while determining the amount
pursuant to Sub-section (2), prescribe a maximum of Three Hundred
Thousand Rupees depending on the condition of the victim.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Commission shall not take any decision regarding
compensation if the victim has already received compensation or if
the proceedings for compensation have already been moved forward
pursuant to other prevailing laws regarding human rights violation.
(5) The criteria to be adopted while taking decision to
provide compensation pursuant to this Section and other provisions
regarding Compensation shall be as prescribed.
Implementation of the Recommendation, Decision or Order
of the Commission: (1) The Commission shall have to write to
the concerned official, individual or agency for the implementation
of the recommendation, decision or order issued by the Commission
pursuant to the Constitution or this Act.
(2) In case of receiving in writing from the Commission to
implement the recommendation, decision or order as referred to in
Sub-section (1), the concerned official, individual or agency shall
have to inform the Commission generally upon implementing such
recommendation, decision or orders.
(3) The concerned official, individual or agency shall have
to send a report to the Commission containing information about the
difficulties in implementing the recommendation, decision or order
of the Commission, citing the reasons thereof, within Two months
from the date of receiving the recommendation, decision or orders
from the Commission pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) If information pursuant to Sub-section (3) is received, the
Commission shall reconsider the matter and take a decision and the
Commission, while taking a decision accordingly, may make
recommendations for implementation as it is or with amendments.
(5) If the Commission writes again for implementation after
taking a decision again pursuant to Sub-section (4), the concerned
official, individual or agency shall have to implement accordingly as
soon as possible and inform the Commission.
concerned
agency
shall
provide
compensation to the victim within the period as referred to in Subsection (2) in accordance with the decision of the Commission. If the
victim has died or if he or she is not sound mentally, compensation
shall be provided to the person considered appropriate by the
Commission from among his or her dependents including husband or
wife, father, mother, son, daughter, elder brother, younger brother,
elder sister, younger sister, grandson, granddaughter or grandfather or
grandmother.
(7) If in the decision of the Commission, it is deemed that
human rights violation took place after an official acted with mala
fide intention or with prejudice against anyone and that
compensation has to be provided to the victim from such official,
the compensation shall be provided by the agency in which such an
official holds an office.
(8) The amount of compensation provided to the victim by
the concerned agency pursuant to Sub-section (7) shall be deducted
from the monthly salary or any other amount to be received by the
concerned official.
Provided that, if such official has already been retired from
service at the time of Commission's decision, the concerned agency
shall have to provide the amount of compensation to the victim for
the time being and shall have to recover such an amount from such
individual pursuant to prevailing law.
(9) If cash has been provided as an interim relief pursuant to

Section 9 such as an amount shall be deducted as prescribed while
providing compensation to the victim pursuant to this Section.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, with regards to matters on which recommendation has been
made by the Commission pursuant to Clause (c) of Sub-Article (2) of

Article 132 of the Constitution, if the Attorney General decides that a
case cannot be initiated pursuant to prevailing laws, the Office of
the Attorney General shall have to inform to the Commission
thereof.
(11) The Commission may write to the concerned authority for the
departmental or other action to be taken against the official, person or the
authority whose name has been recorded on the basis of their noncooperation in connection with human rights violations or the
investigation of inquiry carried out pursuant to this Act or on the basis of
non-compliance of the directives issued by the Commission pursuant to
Sub-section (7).
(12) The Commission may write to the concerned authority on the
basis of the recommendations with regard to the official or the persons
whose name has been made public as the human rights violators as
referred to in the Sub-section (7),
(13) Other provisions regarding the implementation of
recommendation, order or decision of the Commission shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter -4
Miscellaneous
Commission may Coordinate or Collaborate with Other
Agencies: The Commission may, in the course of performing its
functions consult or seek assistance from or maintain necessary
coordination or collaboration with any Commission, committee or
any other agency.
May Provide or Seek Expert Services: (1) The Commission
may, in relation to any matters related to human rights, provide
specialized or expert services pursuant to the request made by any
agency as prescribed.
(2) The Commission may seek the services of any specialized
agency or expert in the course of performing its functions as
prescribed.
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the agency or the
expert providing specialized or expert services pursuant to Subsection (2) and the facilities to be received by such agency or expert
shall be as determined by the Commission.
Contact
Relation
Maintained
Organizations: (1) The Commission may to discharge its
responsibilities effectively in accordance with the Constitution, this
Act and other prevailing laws, maintain necessary contact and relation
with the national and international organizations related with
protection and promotion of human rights and enter into
agreements with them in order to exchange cooperation.
(2) If financial matters constitute part of such agreement
struck pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission shall have to
seek approval from the Finance Ministry with regards to such
agreement.
(3) If any foreign organization wants to conduct programmes
on the protection and promotion of human rights in Nepal, such an
organization shall have to seek consent of the Commission.
To Help in the Functioning of the Commission: (1) Concerned
agency or official shall have to provide assistance sought by the
Commission.
(2) The Commission shall have to write to initiate
departmental action to the agency concerned against the official
who, intentionally has not provided information, papers or evidence
sought by the Commission or who, intentionally, has not followed the
recommendations, orders or decisions of the Commission or who,
intentionally has not cooperate in its work or those who has
intentionally refused to be present before the Commission on being
summoned.
May send to Court or Other Agencies: In case, the
Commission satisfies that victim shall get justice when a court or
any other agency decides on the matter on which it had launched
an inquiry and investigation or if it satisfies that the matter falls under
the jurisdiction of a court or other agency, it may inform the party
concerned to go to such court or agency to file petitions/lodge
complaints on the matter pursuant to prevailing laws.
23. No Obstruction in the Commission's Functioning: It shall cause
no obstruction in the functioning of the Commission merely on the
ground that the post of any member is vacant.
May Function as an Acting: The senior-most member from
among the members of the Commission shall function as Acting
Chairperson if the post of the Chairperson is vacant or he or she is in
foreign visits or on leave for more than Seven days.
Remuneration and Facilities: (1) The remunerations, conditions
of services and other benefits of the Chairperson and Members shall be
equal to those of the Chairperson and the Members of constitutional
bodies pursuant to the prevalent law.
Provided that, this Clause shall not debar the office bearers to
withdraw the remuneration and benefits which they are enjoying at the
time of commencement of this Act.
Office of the Commission: (1) The central office of the
Commission shall be located in Kathmandu valley.
(2) The Commission may establish its regional, sub-regional or
liaison offices as it requires in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance.
Organizational Structure of the Commission: The Government of
Nepal shall, on the recommendation of the Commission, approve the
organizational structure of the Commission and posts.
Secretary of the Commission: (1) There shall be a Secretary as an
administrative head of the Commission.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall, on the recommendation
of the Commission, appoint the Secretary.
(3) The eligibility, remuneration, facilities and service
conditions of the Secretary shall be equal to that of the employee of
Gazetted Special Class of the Government of Nepal.
(4) The Secretary shall carry out his/her function under the
general direction of the Chairperson.
(5) Other functions, duties and powers of the Secretary, in
addition to the functions, duties and powers prescribed in this Act and
other prevailing laws, shall be as follows:
To undertake administrative and management
work,
To prepare annual budgets, programmes and
plans and submit them to the Commission,
To take care of and maintain movable and
immovable properties of the Commission,
To make necessary arrangements for smooth
operation of the Commission's work and
proceedings,
To implement or cause to implement effectively
the policies, programmes and decisions of the
Commission,
To undertake other works as prescribed.
(6) If the post of the Secretary falls vacant, the Commission
may designate the senior-most officer as Acting Secretary from
among the officer-level employees working in the Commission until
further arrangement is made.
Logo of the Commission: The Commission may bring into use a
separate logo apart from the Coat-of-Arms of the State.
Delegation of Power: The Commission may delegate some of
the powers vested with it in accordance with the Constitution and
this Act to the Chairperson, Member or any officer-level employee
Commission,
officer-level
employee
Government of Nepal or a committee or taskforce formed by the
Commission or any agency, organization or individual.
Liaison with the Government of Nepal: Office of the Prime
Minister and the Council of Ministers, shall liaison the commission
with Government of Nepal.
Provided that, this Section shall not be construed to have
obstructed the Commission in maintaining direct contact with any
other agency in course of performing of its functions.
Power to Frame Rules, Procedures and Directives: (1) The
Commission may framing necessary Rules to fulfill the objectives of
this Act. Among such Rules, while framing the Rules involving
moneys to be charged on the Government of Nepal, it shall have to
seek approval from Ministry of Finance.
(2) The Commission may formulate and implement necessary
procedures or directives to carry out its functions in a well-organized
Protection of action taken in Good Faith: Regarding any act
done or intended to be done in good faith by the Commission or the
Chairperson or a Member or employee or any individual assigned by
the Commission pursuant to this Act or Rules there under, no suit or
legal proceedings shall be initiated.
To be in Accordance with the Prevailing Laws: In the matters
contained in this Act, this Act shall prevail and in other matters,
action shall be taken in accordance with prevailing laws.
Repeal and Savings: (1) Human Rights Commission Act, 2053 is,
hereby, repealed.
(2) Functions and proceedings undertaken in accordance with
Human Rights Commission Act, 2053 shall be considered as
undertaken in accordance with this Act.

===== SOURCE: National-Penal-code(2074).pdf =====

Revised
The National Penal (Code) Act, 2017
Date of Authentication:
16 October 2017
Act number 36 of the year 2017
An Act Made To Amend And Consolidate Laws In Force Relating To
Criminal Offences
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to provide for a timely code on criminal
offences, by amending and consolidating the laws in force relating to
criminal offences, in order to uphold morality, decency, etiquette,
convenience, economic interest of the public, by maintaining law and order
in the country, maintain harmonious relationship and peace among various
religious and cultural communities, and prevent and control criminal
offences;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1)
of Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

Part -1
General Provisions

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"National Penal (Code) Act, 2017".
It shall commence on 17 August 2018 (first day of the month
of Bhadra of the year 2075).
Extra-territorial application of the Act: Any person who commits any
of the following offences outside Nepal shall be punished under this Act
as if he or she committed such offence in Nepal:
Any offence under Chapter 1 of Part 2 except Section
Any offence under Chapter 17 of Part 2 committed by
kidnapping any person from Nepal,
Any offence under Sections 167, 276 and 279,
Any offence under Chapters 22 and 23 of Part 2
committed with intent to bring into use in or import into
Nepal,
Any offence under this Act committed in the course of
discharging duties of any position in the Government of
Nepal, State Government or Local Level or a body
corporate under full or majority ownership or control of
the Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level.
Any person who commits an offence under this Act on board
an aircraft or ship registered in Nepal while it is outside Nepal shall be
punished under this Act as if he or she committed the offence in Nepal.
Any Nepali citizen who commits any of the following
offences against a Nepali citizen outside Nepal shall be punished under this
Act as if he or she committed the offence in Nepal:
Murder, or attempt to, abetment of, or conspiracy to,
murder,
Abandonment of the helpless person,
Grievous hurt,
Kidnapping, hostage-taking or illegal detention,
Rape or incest,
Criminal mischief against the Government of Nepal,
State Government or Local Level or a body corporate
under full or majority ownership or control of the
Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level, extortion, criminal breach of trust, forgery, theft,
deception, robbery or criminal misappropriation of
property,
Offence under Section 158,
Offences relating to marriage under Chapter-11 of Part
Food and drug adulteration with the intention of
importing into Nepal,
Offences relating to medical treatment under Sections
231, 232 and 233,
Offence under Chapter-2 of Part 3.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Act,-
“court” means the Supreme Court, High Court or
District Court, and this term also includes a court, other
judicial body or authority authorized by law to proceed
and adjudicate any specific types of criminal offences,
“harbor” means supplying any person with food, drink,
shelter, money, in-kind, clothes, arms, ammunition or
means of transport, or helping or otherwise assisting any
person to evade apprehension,
“offence” means an act punishable by this Act or law,
“law” means law for the time being in force,
“act” means a series of acts, and this term also includes
omission to do an act required by law to be done or
commission of an act prohibited by law,
"grave offence" means an offence punishable by a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of more than three
but less than ten years,
"heinous offence" means an offence punishable by
imprisonment for life or for a term of more than ten
years,
"body" means the body of a human being,
“judge” means the authority of a court who proceeds,
hears and adjudicates a case, and this term also includes
any authority authorized to proceed, hear and adjudicate
any specific type of criminal cases,
“public servant” means any of the following persons:
a person elected, nominated or appointed to any
office with public accountability pursuant to the
Constitution or other law,
a person appointed to the service of the
Government of Nepal or State Government or any
other government service pursuant to law or a
contract,
a person elected, nominated or appointed to any
office of a Local Level or District Assembly or a
person appointed in any manner to the service of
such Level or District Assembly,
an office-bearer of a body corporate under full or
majority ownership or control of the Government
of Nepal, State Government or Local Level or a
person appointed to the service of such body, or
a person otherwise appointed to, or holding, any
office with public accountability.
“Local Level” means a Village Body (Gownpalika) or
Municipality,
“body corporate” means a body established by any law
or registered in accordance with law,
“Constitution” means the Constitution of Nepal,
“public document” means any of the following
documents:
(1) a document passed by the Legislature,
(2) a document recording official acts performed by
the President pursuant to the Constitution,
(3) a book, record or other document issued by the
Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level or offices under the Government of Nepal,
State
Government
Local
Level
Constitutional Body or office-bearer, court or
body established by an Act or Order, office of a
body corporate under full or majority ownership
or control of the Government of Nepal or
maintained in the archive of such offices,
(4) a judgment, decision or order made by a court.
Generally applicable principles and provisions: The principles
and provisions referred to in Chapters-2, 3, 4 and 5 of Part 1 of this
Act shall generally apply to the offences under this Act and other
Acts.
Application of special Act: Where a special Act defines a specific
act as a separate offence and provides punishment for it, that Act
shall apply to such offence.

Chapter2
General Principles of Criminal Justice
Lawful act not to be offence: No act required by law to be done or
excused by law shall be considered to be an offence.
Not punishment except in accordance with law: No person shall
be liable to punishment for doing an act not punished by law nor
shall a person be subjected to punishment which is heavier than the
one prescribed by law in force when the offence was committed.
Act done by mistake of fact not to be offence: No act done by a
person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact, in good faith
believes that he or she is bound by law to do that act or that such act
is excused by law shall be considered to be an offence.
Provided that no act done in ignorance of law shall be
excused.
No punishment again for the same offense: No person shall be
prosecuted in a court and punished again for the same offence.
No deprivation of fair trial: No person shall be deprived of fair trial
in proceedings by a competent court or judicial authority.
No compulsion to testify against oneself: No person accused of an
offence shall be compelled to testify against himself or herself.
Presumption of innocence until proven guilty: A person accused
of an offence shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty of that
offence.
Act of a child not to be offence: No act done by a child below ten
years of age shall be considered to be an offence.
Act of a person of unsound mind not to be offence: No act done
by a person who, at the time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of
mind, is incapable of knowing the nature, characteristic, fault or
consequence of such act, shall be considered to be an offence.
Act done by consent not to be offence: Except where done with the
intention of causing death or grievous hurt or with the knowledge
that it is likely to cause death or grievous hurt, no act done by a
person by obtaining consent of a person above eighteen years of age
which causes any harm to the person who has given such consent
shall be considered to be an offence.
Act done for benefit by consent not to be offence: No act done by
a person in good faith and with due care for the benefit of another
person by consent of that other person which causes harm to that
person who has given such consent shall be considered to be an
offence.
Act done for benefit by consent of guardian not to be offence: No
act done in good faith and with due care for the benefit of a person
below eighteen years of age, or of unsoundness of mind due to
mental illness, by his or her guardian or another person by consent of
the guardian, which causes harm to that person shall be considered to
be an offence.
Provided that except where done for the purpose of preventing
death or grievous hurt, no person who does an act with the
knowledge that it is likely to cause death or grievous hurt shall be
dispensed with criminal liability.
Act done for benefit without consent not to be offence: Where any
act must be done immediately for the benefit of a person, and such
person is, for any reason, not in a position to give consent
immediately or has no guardian from whom it is possible to obtain
consent on such person's behalf immediately, such act done in good
faith and with due care for the benefit of that person without his or
her consent, which causes harm or injury to that person, shall not be
considered to be an offence.
Explanation: For the purposes of Sections 16 and 17, and this
Section, the term “benefit” does not mean:
a pecuniary benefit,
an act done with intent to cause death, or without any
reasonable cause, a grievous hurt.
To be considered an offence even committed by consent:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 15,16 or 17, where
any act referred to in any of those Sections is considered to be
another offence under law, such act shall be considered to be an
offence even if it is done by consent.
Consent: Consent may be expressed orally or in writing or by
gesture or conduct.
Provided that consent given in any of the following
circumstances shall not be considered to be consent:
Where the consent is given by a person under a
mistake of fact or fear or threat of any kind of
injury or harm and the doer of the act in
pursuance of such consent knows, or has reason
to believe, that the consent was so given,
Where the consent is given by a person who,
being of unsound mind due to mental illness, is
unable to understand characteristic, fault and
consequence of the consent given by him or her
when he or she was in a state of unsoundness of
mind,
Where the consent is given by a child below
eighteen years of age,
Where the consent is given under undue
influence.
21. Harm caused by communication made in good faith not to be
offence: No information or communication of any matter made in
good faith shall be considered to be an offence by reason of any harm
to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that
person.
22. Act compelled by fear, threat not to be offence: No act done by a
person who is compelled to do it by fear or threat exerted or made by
another person carrying a deadly weapon or toxic or explosive
substance that the other person would kill or cause grievous hurt to
that person or his or her close relative if that person does not do that
act immediately and there is a reasonable cause to apprehend that it
would cause death or grievous injury to that person or close relative if
such act is not done immediately shall be considered to be an offence.
Provided that such act shall be considered to be an offence if:
Death or grievous hurt is caused,
Rape is committed,
An offence against the State is committed, or
The doer of such act placed himself or herself in such
situation of fear or threat, of his or her own accord or as
a result of any thing done by himself or herself.
A person who causes the offence to be committed by
exerting fear or threat under sub-section (1) shall be punished by law
as if he or she committed the offence by himself or herself.
Act done in good faith to prevent other harm, injury not to be
offence: Any act done by a person shall not be considered to be an
offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it
is likely to cause harm, injury, if it be done without any criminal
intent to cause harm, injury, and in good faith for the purpose of
preventing or avoiding possible great harm, injury to life, person or
property and it was so imminent that greater harm, injury than such
act was likely to result in would be caused to the life, person or
property of him or her or any one else if such act was not done
immediately.
Act done for private defence not considered to be offence: (1)
Any act done in the exercise of the right of private defence subject to
this Chapter shall not be considered to be an offence.
Every person has a right to defend the body, life or
property of his or her own or of any other person against any illegal
harm.
The right of private defence under this Section shall be
exercised only when there is a reasonable apprehension or reasonable
cause to believe that the body, life or property of his or her own or of
any other person cannot be defended against any illegal harm unless
any act is done immediately.
Restriction on the exercise of right of private defense: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 24, the right of
private defense is not available in the following circumstances or
against the following acts:
(a) Where there is time to have or likely to have recourse
to the protection of public authority immediately to
defend the body or property of any one against illegal
harm at the time of causing such harm,
(b) Where harm caused to the body or property of a person
was so caused by reason that the harm doer was
provoked by such person himself or herself,
(c) Where a public servant does an act in good faith in
pursuance of a judgment or order of a court,
(d) Where a public servant does an act in good faith in the
exercise of his or her official power,
(e) Where any act is done by a person in pursuance of a
direction given in good faith by a public servant in the
exercise of his or her official power.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
a person shall not be deprived of the right of private defense in the
following circumstances:
(a) Where that person does not know or have a
reasonable reason to believe that the doer of the act
referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) is a public
servant and he or she is doing the act in pursuance of
the judgment or order of a court or the doer does not
disclose his or her identity or produce the authority
under which he or she acts even if so demanded,
(b) Where there is no reasonable reason to know or
believe that the doer of the act referred to in clause
(d) of sub-section (1) is a public servant,
(e) Where there is no reasonable reason to know or
believe that the doer of the act referred to in clause
(e) of sub-section (1) is doing such act by the
direction of a public servant or the doer does not
state that authority under which he or she acts or
does not produce the authority under which he or she
acts even if so demanded.
While exercising the right of private defence under

Section 24 or this Section, more force than reasonably necessary for
such defence cannot be used.
No right to cause death: (1) In exercising the right of private
defence pursuant to this Chapter, no one shall have the right to cause
a person’s death.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if any act done in the exercise of the right of private defence subject
to sub-section (3) of Section 25, in any of the following
circumstances, causes the death of a person, such act shall not be
considered to be an offence:
(a) Where there is reasonable cause to believe that an assault on
oneself or another person would cause the death of or
serious injury or grievous hurt to oneself or another person
unless instant defence is exercised against such assault,
(b) Where any act is instantly done by the victim having
reasonable cause to believe that the assault is made with the
intention of committing rape or at the time of or after the
commission of rape,
(c) Where hostage-taking or kidnapping is committed with the
intention of causing death, taking ransom for hostage-taking
or kidnapping, committing rape, causing grievous hurt,
(d) Where attempt is made to cause mischief by seizing, using a
deadly weapon, setting fire to or using explosive substance
on, any building, tent which is used for human dwelling or
as the place for worship or pray or the custody of property
or a means of transport,
(e) Where it is necessary to defend against robbery,
(f) Where the circumstance requires an instant retaliation by a
security personnel deputed by order of the competent
authority for the personal security of a person or security of
a property of the Government of Nepal, State Government
or Local Level or a body corporate under full or majority
ownership or control of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level or public property in order to
prevent an assault made on such person or property.
Act causing slight harm not to be offence: A slight harm not to be
complained of by a person of ordinary sense shall not be considered
to be an offence.
Major liable to punishment for offence caused to be committed
by child: Where an offence is committed by a child upon being
lured, taught or influenced by a person to do so, such person shall be
liable to punishment as if the offence were committed by himself or
herself.
Criminal intention not to be examined in strict liability offence:
In an offence which is a strict liability offence under this Act or the
law, there shall not be examined whether or not the offence was
committed intentionally.
Criminal liability for offence committed by body corporate to be
vested on one who commits or causes the commission of the act:
Where any firm, company or body corporate commits, or causes the
commission of, an act considered to be an offence under this Act or
law, the person who committed, or caused the commission of, such
offence shall be responsible for such act; and where such person
cannot be identified, the concerned owners and partners who did
such act, in the case of a firm, the director, managing director,
general manager who did or caused the doing of such act, in the case
of a company or body corporate, and where even such person cannot
be identified, the chief executive of such body shall bear the criminal
liability.
All members to be punished for offence committed by a group:
Where an offence is committed by a group of two or more persons,
all members of the group shall be liable to punishment for such
offence.
Victim of crime to be entitled to obtain information of
proceedings of case and compensation: (1) The victim of crime
shall have the right to obtain information about the investigation and
proceedings of the case in which he or she is the victim.
The victim of crime shall have the right to justice with
social rehabilitation and compensation.

Chapter -3
Criminal Conspiracy, Attempt, Abetment and Accomplice
33. Prohibition of criminal conspiracy: (1) No person shall make a
criminal conspiracy.
Where two or more persons agree to commit, or cause
the commission of, an offence, and any act is done by only one or
two of them, they shall be considered to have committed a criminal
conspiracy.
A person who commits, or causes the commission of, a
criminal conspiracy to commit an offence of heinous or grave nature
shall, where no provision is made elsewhere in this Act for a separate
punishment for such conspiracy, be punished as follows:
Where the offence in pursuance of the criminal
conspiracy is committed, punishment imposable
if the offence had been committed,
Where another offence instead of the offence in
pursuance
criminal
conspiracy
committed and such other offence is committed in
the course of implementation of such conspiracy
or as probable consequence thereof, punishment
specified for that offence,
Where any offence in addition to the offence in
pursuance of the criminal conspiracy is also
committed and such offence is also committed in
the course of implementation of such conspiracy
or as a probable consequence thereof, additional
punishment also for such offence,
Where the offence of criminal conspiracy is yet to
be completed, one half of the punishment
specified for that offence.
34. Prohibition of attempt to commit offence: (1) No person shall make
attempt to commit an offence.
Even if it is impossible for an offence to be committed
for which attempt is made, attempt shall be considered to have been
committed.
Except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, a
person who attempts, or causes attempt, to commit an offence shall
be punished with one half of the punishment specified for such
offence.
35. Prohibition of abetment: (1) No person shall abet another person to
commit an offence.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), where a person
instigates another person to commit an offence, the person is
considered to have abetted.
The abettor shall be liable to the separate punishment, if
any, provided for in this Act, and to the following punishment if such
separate punishment is not so provided for:
Where the offence is committed in pursuance of the
abetment, the punishment imposable as if he or she had
committed the offence,
Where the offence is yet to be committed in pursuance
of the abetment, one half of the punishment specified
for such offence.
Where an offence is abetted but a different offence is
committed by the abetted person, and that offence was committed
under the influence of the instigation or was a probable consequence of
the abetment, the abettor shall be liable to punishment as if he or she
had committed such offence as well.
36. Not to be accomplice: (1) No person shall become an accomplice to
any offence.
A person who, with the intention of committing an
offence, aids in the commission of such offence or other offence or
who hides the offender or helps the offender to escape after the
commission of the offence or who provides means to commit, or causes
the commission of, the offense or otherwise assists in the commission
of the offence shall be deemed to be an accomplice.
An accomplice shall be punished as follows:
A person who, with participation in a criminal
conspiracy, commits an offence, provides means
or place to commit the offence, or deprives the
person against whom the offence is committed of
the right of private defence or who orders or
advises to commit the offence, shall be punished
as if he or she had committed such offence,
For an accomplice other than one referred to in
clause (a), punishment not exceeding one half of
the punishment imposable for the commission of
such offence according to the degree of his or her
involvement in that act.
37. Statute of limitation to be applicable: The statute of limitation
provided for in this Act for making a compliant in relation to an
offence shall also be applicable to the conspiracy, abetment,
accomplice of, or attempt to, such offence.

Chapter-4
Gravity of Offence Aggravating and Mitigating Factors
Factors aggravating the gravity of offence: For the purposes of
this Act, the following factors, if exist, shall be considered as
aggravating the gravity of an offence:
The offence was committed against the President or
Head of Government or head of a foreign State,
The offence was committed in presence of the President
or Head of Government or head of a foreign State,
The offence was committed by the breach of trust,
The offence was committed by taking benefit of or
abusing a public office,
The offence was committed with the intention of
obstructing a person holding a public office in
discharging his or her official duty or to cause such
person to commit an illegal act,
The offence was committed in any government office,
public office or religious place,
The offence was committed by five or more persons
affiliated in a group,
The offence was committed by taking advantage of the
disturbance of public peace or landslide, flood,
earthquake or natural calamity of similar nature or
outbreak of epidemic, starvation or occurrence of any
other crisis of similar nature,
The offence was committed by carrying or using an arm
or toxic or explosive substance or supplying electricity
or using an electronic device or with the aid of a person
carrying an arm, toxic or explosive substance,
The offence was committed again by an offender
already sentenced to imprisonment,
The offence was committed by being allured of any
remuneration or assurance or benefit,
The offence was committed against a person under
one’s own protection or control or against the property
under one’s own custody,
The offence was committed by subjecting any one to
torture, cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,
More than one offence were committed on a single
occasion,
The offence was committed against more than one
person on a single occasion,
The offence was committed by kidnapping any one or
taking any one hostage,
(q) The offence was committed against a person under
detention, custody, imprisonment or control,
The offence was committed by one who has a duty to
provide security to any person against that person,
The offence was committed with the intention of
destroying the identity of any caste, race or group
(genocide),
The offence was committed with the intention of
causing hatred against any caste, race, religious or
cultural community,
The offence committed was a crime against humanity,
The offence was committed in a planned or organized
manner,
The offence was committed against an elderly person
above seventy-five years of age or a person being of
unsound mind by reason of physical or mental illness or
a person incapable of defending himself or herself
because of disability, or a child,
The offence was committed by a person deputed in
rescue work in cases of motor vehicle, aircraft accident
or natural calamity while being engaged in such rescue
work,
The offence was another offence committed by the same
offender against the person who had already become a
victim of an offence.
39. Factors mitigating the gravity of offence: For the purposes of this
Act, the following factors, if exist, shall be considered as mitigating
the gravity of an offence:
(a) The offender is below eighteen years or above seventyfive years of age,
(b) The offender had no intention to commit the offence,
(c) The person against whom the offence was committed
had, immediately before the commission of the offence,
provoked or given threat to the offender,
(d) The offence was committed instantly as a retaliation
against any grave offence committed against the offender
or any of his or her close relatives,
(e) The offender voluntarily confessed the offence or
expressed a remorse therefor,
(f) The offender surrendered himself or herself to the
concerned authority,
(g) The offender, having confessed the offence committed by
him or her, has already provided or agreed to pay
compensation to the victim,
(h) The offender has diminished capacity because of
physical, mental ability or disability,
The extent of loss or harm caused to the victim and the
society being insignificant,
The offender rendered assistance in judicial process by
telling the truth to the court,
(k) The offender has confessed the guilt and committed not
to commit any criminal offence in the future,
The offence was committed under other's instigation or
pressure.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Punishment and Interim Relief
Types of punishment: (1) The punishments for the offences set
forth in this Act shall be as follows:
Imprisonment for life,
Imprisonment,
Fine,
Imprisonment and fine,
Compensation,
Imprisonment for the failure to pay a fine or
compensation,
Community service in lieu of imprisonment.
Where any law provides for the sentence of confiscation
of property for any offence, such sentence of confiscation shall not
be imposed for that offence, after the commencement of this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, no
sentence of fine of less than one rupee and of imprisonment for a
term of less than one day shall be imposed.
Imprisonment for life: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, in imposing a sentence of imprisonment on an
offender for the following offence, the offender shall be subjected to
imprisonment for the whole of his or her natural life:
(a) Murder with cruelty, torture or inhumane conduct,
(b) Murder by hijacking or exploding an aircraft,
(c) Murder by kidnapping or taking hostage,
(d) Murder by poisoning publicly consumable beverages
or food,
(e) Genocide (destroying the identity of any caste, race or
group) or offence committed with the objective of
committing genocide,
(f) Murder with rape.
Computation of imprisonment for life: Except in the circumstance
referred to in Section 41, the sentence of imprisonment for life shall
be so computed that its term is twenty-five years.
One and half punishment for consolidated/integrated offence: (1)
Where a person, at the time of judgment by a court, is convicted of
more than one offence on a single occasion or different offences on
different occasions, such person shall be deemed to have committed
a consolidated offence.
The offender who commits a consolidated offence
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sentenced for the offence
punishable by the maximum punishment and to additional
punishment of one half of that punishment specified for such
offence.
Additional punishment for offender of heinous crime and
recidivist: (1) If a person who was sentenced for any offence
commits another heinous or grave offence before the expiry of a
period of five years after the date on which he or she completed the
service of that sentence or was granted pardon, he or she shall be
considered to be a recidivist.
A recidivist shall be liable to a punishment that is up to
double the punishment imposable for the last offence committed by
him or her.
Provided that this Section shall not apply to an offender who
has been sentenced to imprisonment for life pursuant to Section 41.
Punishment imposable on children: (1) A person who commits an
act constituting an offence under the law shall not be liable to any
punishment if that person has not attained ten years of age at the time
of the commission of such act.
In imposing the punishment of imprisonment on a
person who is ten years of age or above ten but below fourteen years
of age, such person may be sentenced to imprisonment for a
maximum of six months or sent to a reform home for a maximum of
one year in lieu of such imprisonment.
Where a person who is fourteen years of age or above
fourteen but below sixteen years of age commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment, such person shall be liable to half the
punishment imposable by law on a person who has attained majority.
Where a person who is sixteen years of age or above
sixteen but below eighteen years of age commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment, such person shall be liable to twothirds of the punishment imposable by law on a person who has
attained majority.
Imprisonment for fine: (1) Any offender who is unable to pay a
fine imposed on him or her may be subjected to imprisonment.
The term of imprisonment under sub-section (1) shall be
determined as follows:
In determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of a fine for an offence
punishable by both imprisonment and fine, the
term of imprisonment shall be so determined as
not to exceed ten years.
Where an offence is punishable by either
imprisonment or fine or with both, in which the
offender is sentenced to a fine only, in
determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of such fine, the term of
imprisonment shall be so determined as not to
exceed one half of the maximum term of
imprisonment that can be imposed for such
offence,
Where an offence is punishable by fine only, in
which the offender is sentenced to a fine, in
determining the sentence of imprisonment in
default of payment of such fine, the term of
imprisonment shall be so determined as not to
exceed two years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the following provisions shall apply to the imposition of a sentence
of imprisonment for non-payment of a fine on a child below eighteen
years of age:
In the event of non-payment of a fine for an
offence punishable by fine only or by either fine
or imprisonment, the child shall not be subjected
to imprisonment and the fine shall be remitted.
Where an offence is punishable by imprisonment
or fine or both, in which the offender is sentenced
to a fine only, in determining the sentence of
imprisonment in default of payment of such fine,
the term of imprisonment shall be so determined
as not to exceed three months.
In determining the sentence of imprisonment
pursuant to sub-section (2) to be imposed on a
person who is above fourteen but below eighteen
years of age, the term of imprisonment shall be so
determined as not to exceed half the sentence of
imprisonment imposable on a person above
eighteen years of age.
Remission of sentence: (1) Where any offender, upon having
confessed the offence committed by him or her, has assisted in the
collection of evidence, apprehension of other accused person or gang
or accomplice thereof, in relation to such offence or assisted the
investigating or prosecuting authority or the court, a maximum of
fifty percent of the sentence imposable under law for such offence
may be remitted.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the following offender shall not be entitled to the remission of
sentence:
One who has once obtained remission under subsection (1),
One who has been convicted of any offence
punishable by imprisonment, and a period of
three years has not lapsed since the completion of
service of the sentence of imprisonment,
One who has once been sentenced for any offence
of the same nature as in which the remission of
sentence is sought.
In granting a remission of punishment pursuant to subsection (1), regard shall be had to, inter alia, at which stage of
investigation or trial the accused has confessed the offence and in
what circumstances he or she has made such confession.
Power
court
order
interim
compensation:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, where it
is necessary to immediately provide medical treatment or
compensation or any type of relief amount to a person who has
become victim of an offence in consequence of its commission or a
person who is dependent on him or her, the court may order the
person accused of such offence to provide medical treatment or pay
an interim compensation or relief amount to such person.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
person so accused shall immediately provide such compensation or
amount to the victim or person dependent on him or her.
Where the accused is unable to provide the
compensation or amount pursuant to sub-section (2) in accordance
with the order referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall order that
the compensation or amount be provided to the victim or person
dependent on him or her from the victim relief fund established
pursuant to the laws in force related to the determination and
execution of sentences for criminal offences, and the amount so
provided shall be recovered from such accused person and
reimbursed into such fund.
Where a person who has paid compensation or relief
amount pursuant to this Section is acquitted of the charge by the
judgment of the court, the person who has received such
compensation or relief amount shall, within thirty-five days of such
acquittal, return such amount to such person or to the victim relief
fund referred to in sub-section (3).
Where such person does not return such amount within
the period referred to in sub-section (4), the court shall cause such
amount to be recovered from any assets of such person within thirtyfive days of such acquittal.

Part-2
Criminal Offences

Chapter-1
Offences against the State
Prohibition of undermining sovereignty, integrity or national
unity: (1) No person shall, with the intention of undermining the
independence, sovereignty, geographical or territorial integrity or
national unity of Nepal, collect persons, arms and ammunitions,
build any armed military or paramilitary organization or attempt to
commit such act.
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any kind of
conspiracy, in association with any foreign state, government or
organized force, to undermine the independence, sovereignty,
geographical or territorial integrity or national unity of Nepal.
No person shall abet the commission of the offence
under sub-section (1) or (2).
No person shall commit, or cause to be committed, any
act that gives rise to hatred, enmity or contempt on grounds of class,
race, religion, region, community or similar other ground, which is
likely to jeopardize the sovereignty, geographical or territorial
integrity, nationality, national unity, independence, dignity, or
harmonious relations between federal units, of Nepal or attempt to
commit, or abet the commission of, or make conspiracy to commit,
such act, or undermine or cause to be undermined the cordial
relations subsisting between different castes, races or communities.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in this Section shall be sentenced to the following
punishment:
Imprisonment for life in the case of the offence referred
to in sub-section (1) or (2),
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees in the
case of the offence referred to in sub-section (3),
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees in the case of
the offence referred to in sub-section (4).
Sedition: (1) No person shall, with the intention of overthrowing the
Government of Nepal or the constitutional structure, create any kind
of disorder by demonstrating or using military, paramilitary or
criminal force or form an armed military or paramilitary organization
or make conspiracy, attempt or incitement to commit such act.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to punishment with imprisonment for a
term not exceeding twenty-five years.
No person shall, by words, either spoken or written or
by figure or signs or otherwise, showing any baseless or
unsubstantiated matter in relation to the Government of Nepal or any
action of the Government of Nepal, bring or attempt to bring into
hatred, enmity or contempt towards the Government of Nepal or
cause the commission of such act.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be
considered to render any healthy or decent criticism of the
Government of Nepal to be the offence.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (3) shall be liable to the sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
Prohibition of act against national interest: (1) No one shall do, or
cause to be done, any act against national interest.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), where any person
does, or causes to be done, any of the following acts, he or she shall
be considered to have done an act against national interest:
To dishonor or degrade or spread hatred or
enmity
against
freedom,
sovereignty,
geographical or territorial integrity, nationality,
independence, self-esteem of, or international
image of, Nepal,
To encroach the international boundary of Nepal,
or remove or dislocate any boundary pillar,
except in accordance with agreement with a
neighbouring country, or to so change any
boundary pillar as to be prejudicial to the
geographical or territorial integrity of Nepal.
Any Nepali player or a group of Nepali players, who
representing Nepal, plays any match in competition with any player
or players in Nepal or a foreign country shall not play, or cause to be
played, such match in connivance with or under the influence of any
one in a manner to manipulate a natural result of such match or to
make a bet win or lose, and where any match has been so played,
the offence against national interest shall be considered to have been
committed.
Any person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (2) or (3) shall be liable to the following punishment:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees, in the case of the offence
referred to in sub-section (2),
(b) A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and fine not exceeding
thirty thousand rupees, in the case of the offence
referred to in sub-section (3).
Where any person has transacted money in the course of
the commission of the offence referred to in sub-section (2) or (3),
the amount of money so transacted shall be forfeited, in addition to
the punishment pursuant to sub-section (4).
Any person who orders, directs, abets, incites or
facilitates the commission of the offence referred to in sub-section
(3) shall be liable to punishment as if that person were the principal
offender.
Where the offence referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) is
committed by a public office holder or a person representing Nepal,
while in a foreign country, he or she shall be liable to additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
Prohibition of genocide: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, genocide.
For the purpose of sub-section (1), any of the following
acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, an
ethnical, racial, national or religious group, or any attempt or
conspiracy to commit such act, shall be considered to be the offence
of genocide:
Mass killing of members of such group, in a
planned way, at one or several times,
Causing grievous hurt to the body of, or causing
serious bodily or mental harm to, members of
such group, in a planned way, at one or several
times,
Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of
life, inter alia, the depriving its members of
access to essential goods such as water, food, fuel
and medicine, by hindering the supply or
movement of such goods, thereby deliberately
making painful the life of members of such
group, calculated to bring about its physical
destruction in whole or in part,
Forcibly imposing measures on members of such
group intended to prevent births within the group,
except in cases of voluntary use by such members
of family planning means,
Forcibly transferring children of such group to
another group.
Any person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following punishment:
Imprisonment for life, in the case of the offence
referred to in clause (a),
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years
and fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
addition to the sentence imposable under this Act
for grievous hurt or hurt to human body, in the
case of the offence referred to in clause (b),
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years,
in the case of the offence referred to in clause (c),
(d) or (e).
Where the offence referred to in this Section is
committed in pursuance of order or direction given by a person or
group, whether organized or unorganized, the person, or the
responsible person or persons of such group giving such order or
direction shall be liable as the principal offender.
Where the offence referred to in this Section has been
committed by a group or with the involvement of several persons,
every person involved in such offence shall be equally liable as the
offender.
Where any person who commits the offence referred to
in this Section is a public office holder, he or she shall not be
allowed to make a plea that such offence has been committed in the
course of executing a superior order or maintaining law and order or
enforcing law, and that person shall not enjoy any remission or
waiver from sentence on the ground that he or she has made such
plea.
Prohibition of waging war against Nepal or assist the army of a
State at war with Nepal: (1) No person shall wage or declare to
wage war against Nepal, by raising arms, or attempt or threat to
wage such war, or collect arms, ammunition or form a military or
paramilitary organization with intent to wage war against Nepal.
No person shall, in any situation whether a state of war
is declared or not, supply any kind of strategic or military
information or otherwise render assistance to any foreign army
engaged in war with Nepal or attempt to do so.
Where a declaration is made by the Government of
Nepal prohibiting the making of relation or transaction with a State
engaged in war with Nepal, any citizen or corporate body of such
State or the importing or obtaining of any goods or services of such
State, no person shall make such relation or transaction with such
State, citizen or body or import or obtain such goods or services.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for life, and a person who commits the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty-five years and a fine
not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
Prohibition of waging war or insurrection against friendly State:
(1) No person shall, using the territory of Nepal, wage or threaten to
wage war, by raising arms, or attempt to wage such war or insurrect
or attempt to insurrect against a State having diplomatic relations
with Nepal.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
Prohibition of giving provocation to army or police: (1) No
person shall abet or give provocation to the desertion of a soldier,
police or armed police personnel or officer in the Nepal Army, Nepal
Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal from the Nepal Army, Nepal
Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal or abet the breach of discipline
by such soldier, police or armed police personnel or attempt to
seduce such soldier, police or armed police personnel from his or her
duty, or, knowing or having reason to believe that a soldier, police or
armed police personnel has so deserted the Army or Police or Force,
harbor such deserter.
A person who commits, or causes to be
committed the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
Prohibition of espionage: (1) No person shall, with intent to
undermine the sovereignty, security or geographical or territorial
integrity of Nepal or to prejudice the interests of Nepal or with the
knowledge that such consequence is likely, or being induced by any
foreign country or international organization, supply to any one any
information relating to the military situation, strategic arrangement
or internal security of Nepal or relating to any matter that must be
kept confidential by the Government of Nepal from the political,
economic or diplomatic viewpoint or confidential document, or any
matter that is confidential or must be kept confidential under law or
conspire or attempt to commit, or abet the commission of, such act or
do any other act with intent to supply such information, and a person
who commits such act shall be considered to have committed
espionage.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed,
espionage referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to punishment
as follows:
In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter of
military situation, strategic arrangement or internal
security of Nepal, a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twenty-five years,
(a) In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter that must
be kept confidential by the Government of Nepal from
the political, economic or diplomatic viewpoint or any
other confidential document, that must be kept
confidential by the Government of Nepal from the
political, economic or diplomatic viewpoint or any other
confidential document, a sentence of imprisonment for a
term ranging from five to ten years,
(c) In the case of a person who commits, or causes to be
committed, espionage in relation to any matter other
than that set forth in clauses (a) and (b), a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine of fifty thousand rupees,
(d) In the case of a person who, despite the knowledge that
any one is going to commit espionage, does not give
information thereof to the Government of Nepal, a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
year and a fine of one hundred thousand rupees.
Prohibition of assault on President: (1) No person shall assassinate
or attempt to assassinate the President of Nepal.
No person shall, in any manner, abduct, or cause to be
abducted, the President of Nepal or take, or cause to be taken, him or
her hostage.
No person shall, in any manner, assault, or cause to be
assaulted, the President of Nepal.
A person who commits any offence referred to in this
Section shall be liable to punishment as follows:
In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (1), a sentence of imprisonment for life,
In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (2), a sentence of imprisonment for a term
ranging from ten to fifteen years,
In the case of the offence referred to in subsection (3), a sentence of imprisonment for a term
ranging from five to ten years.
Prohibition of intimidation of President or Parliament: (1) No
person shall intimidate, whether by using any kind of force or not,
show fear or terror to, or otherwise overawe the President or
Parliament of Nepal with intent to prevent or restrain the President or
Parliament of Nepal from performing any of the functions required
to be performed pursuant to the Constitution or law or compel the
President or Parliament of Nepal to perform the functions in any
specific manner.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years or a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees or with both.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"Parliament" means the Federal Parliament and the State Assembly
under the Constitution of Nepal, and this term also includes the
Legislature-Parliament.
Statute of limitation: (1) No statute of limitation shall apply to a
complaint with regard to any of the offences under Sections 49, 50,
51 52, 53 and 57.
In the case of the offences under the Sections of this
Chapter, except those Sections set forth in sub-section (1), no
complaint shall be entertained after the expiry of two years of the
date of knowledge of the commission of the offence.

Chapter-2
Offences against Public Tranquility
Prohibition of unlawful assembly: (1) No person shall be engaged
in an unlawful assembly.
An assembly of five or more persons with the objective
of doing any of the following acts shall be considered to be an
unlawful assembly:
By means of force or show of force or show of a
deadly weapon:
to prevent any public servant from
exercising the lawful functions or duties,
to take or obtain possession of anyone’s
property,
to deprive any person of the enjoyment of
the right of way, use of water, public
transport or communication or similar
other utilities,
to compel any person to do what he or she
is not legally bound to do or to omit to do
what he or she is legally entitled to do.
To hinder, resist the execution of any law, or of any
legal process,
To commit any offence punishable by a sentence of
imprisonment.
Any person who, with the knowledge that it is an
unlawful assembly, joins the assembly shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months and a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees where he or she has joined it without
arms, and imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine
not exceeding ten thousand rupees where he or she has joined it with
arms.
Any person who himself or herself does not join an
unlawful assembly but hires or otherwise induces or overawes
another to join such assembly shall be liable to the sentence referred
to in sub-section (3) as if he or she himself or herself had joined such
unlawful assembly.
Prohibition of breach of order issued to prevent or disperse
unlawful assembly: (1) Where a competent authority makes an
order to prevent or disperse an unlawful assembly, no person shall
participate or continue in such assembly.
A person who continues in, participates in, or joins an
unlawful assembly under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both.
Every member to be considered to have committed offence:
Where any member of an unlawful assembly commits any offence in
the achievement of the object of such assembly, every member of
such assembly who aids and assists knowingly at the time of the
commission of offence shall be considered to have committed the
offence.
Prohibition of rioting: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, the offence of rioting.
Where an unlawful assembly or a member thereof uses
force or destroys, damages or causes loss to any public or private
property in the course of achievement of the object of such assembly,
every member of such assembly shall be considered to have
committed the offence of rioting.
Every person who commits the offense referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees if he or she is armed with a deadly weapon, and to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees if he or she is not armed with
a deadly weapon.
Prohibition of abetting rioting: (1) No person shall, with intent to
cause the commission of rioting or with the knowledge that rioting is
likely to be committed, abet the commission of rioting by another
person.
A person who abets under sub-section (1) shall be liable
to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, if
the offence of rioting is committed, and to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, if the offence of
rioting is not committed, or to a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or the both sentences.
Prohibition of acts prejudicial to public tranquility: (1) No
person, by words, either spoken or written or by signs or otherwise
shall do any act which, on the ground of religion, color, caste, race,
community or language, is prejudicial to harmonious relationship
between peoples of different classes, regions or communities of
Nepal.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) in any shrine, deity place, place of worship or pray or in
any assembly engaged in the performance of a religious or cultural
festival or ceremony shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, in addition to the
sentence referred to in sub-section (2).
Prohibition of obstructing public servant: (1) No person shall
obstruct or attempt to obstruct any public official in the discharge of
his or her duty in endeavoring to prevent or disperse an unlawful
assembly or to suppress a riot.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both sentences.
Prohibition of obstructing movement in public place: (1) No
person, by show of any kind of fear or terror, shall close the
operation of a public road, way, rope-way, cable-car, airport,
railway, water transportation route, postal and other public service,
or obstruct, in any way, the movement of pedestrians, motor vehicles
or animals by obstructing, in any way, a public road, way, rope-way,
cable-car way, airport, railway or water transportation route or
impede or obstruct, in any way, any person in entering into any
public place except in accordance with the order of a competent
authority under a law.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of obstructing public services: (1) No person shall, by
show of any kind of fear or threat, close, or obstruct, in any way, the
operation of public electricity, telecommunication or other public
services of similar nature or public service specified in law.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Prohibition of violating curfew: (1) No person shall knowingly
violate a curfew order imposed by a competent authority under law
to prevent an unlawful assembly, riot or any other act that breaches
tranquility.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
Not to spread rumor: (1) No person shall, with intent to breach
public tranquility, commit rioting or undermine or jeopardize the
sovereignty, geographical or territorial integrity of Nepal or
harmonious relation between different races, castes or communities,
spread or propagate rumors or hold a procession with slogans, in a
manner to provoke any one.
Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,
the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of providing house, land or vehicle for breaching
peace: No person, knowingly or having a reasonable reason to know
that another person is going to breach public peace or commit
rioting, shall provide his or her house, land, vehicle or arm to that
other person.
Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,
the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of holding tourch procession in sensitive public area:
(1) No person shall, with intent to breach public peace, hold any
tourch procession or assembly or procession carrying a fire or
inflammable substance in any place specified as the sensitive public
area by order of the competent authority in view of the sovereignty,
geographical or territorial integrity, security of Nepal or pubic
tranquility or decency.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of destroying or damaging essential commodities: (1)
No person shall, having committed any offence under this Chapter,
destroy, damage or set on fire, or cause to be done so, any
commodity which is regarded as an essential commodity under the
law or public or private property or disorder such commodity or
property by himself or herself or cause it to be disordered by another
person, steal such commodity or property or knowingly buy or sell,
or cause to be bought or sold, any commodity obtained by theft.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to an additional sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten
thousand rupees or both the sentences, in addition to the sentence
imposable for any offence referred to in this Chapter.
Where such commodity or property has already been
destroyed or damaged from the offence referred to in sub-section (1),
a compensation equal to the claimed amount shall also be recovered
from such person.
Where the person who has committed the offence
referred to in sub-section (1) is identified, such person, and where
such person is not so identified, the person who induces or orders the
commission of such act shall be considered to have committed the
offence.
Statute of limitation: No complaint on an offence under this
Chapter shall lie after the lapse of three months from the date of
commission of such offence.

Chapter-3
Offences Relating to Contempt of Authority of Public Servants
Prohibition of obstructing the service of summons, process etc.:
(1) No person shall obstruct in or object to, or cause to be done so,
the service of a summons, process, arrest warrant, notice or order
issued under a law or the making of search, seizure, survey,
measurement or public inquiry or arresting any person in pursuance
of a warrant.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Where a public servant commits the offence referred to
in sub-section (1), he or she shall be liable to an additional sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months.
Prohibition of refusing to receive and returning summons,
process, notice or order: (1) Where a person in whose name a
summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or order has been issued
under law is tendered for the service thereof on him or her, such
person shall, with mala fide intention, not refuse to receive, and
return, such summons, process, notice or arrest warrant.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of absconding to avoid service of summons, process,
notice or order: (1) No person, being legally bound to receive a
summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or order issued by the
competent authority, shall abscond, with mala fide intention to avoid
being served with such summons, process, notice, arrest warrant or
order.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of tearing out or removing summons, process etc.:
(1) No person shall, with mala fide intention, tear out or remove a
summons, process, arrest warrant, notice or order affixed to a place
in accordance with law, until its purpose is served.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of serving process in a false manner: (1) No person
who is legally bound to serve, or cause to be served, a process shall
serve the process in a false manner.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
Prohibition of omission to produce document: (1) No person who
is legally bound to produce or deliver up any document to any office,
court or public servant under law shall omit so to produce or deliver
up such document.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of making false statement by person under oath: (1)
A person who is bound by law or by an oath to state the truth on any
subject to any competent authority or is a public office holder upon
taking oath under law shall not, in that capacity, state any false
statement.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of refusing oath: (1) No person who is present before
the competent authority to state the truth on any subject shall refuse
to take an oath to state the truth on such subject when so required to
take such oath.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of refusing to answer: (1) No person who is under a
legal duty to state the truth on any subject to a competent authority
shall refuse to answer any question demanded of him or her on such
subject by such authority.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to testify against
himself or herself.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of giving false information: (1) No person shall give
any false information to any one, with intent to prevent any public
servant from doing any act which he or she is bound by law to do or
to cause such public servant to do anything which he or she need not
or ought not to do.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
Prohibition of obstructing: (1) No person shall, by way of
intimidation or force or in any other way, obstruct or hinder any
public servant, who is discharging his or her public duties, in the
discharge of such duties.
No person shall knowingly obstruct or hinder the
process of forfeiture, collection of records, withholding, auction or
sale of any property being carried out in accordance with law.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) or (2) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of refusing to render assistance to public servant: (1)
No person under a legal duty to render assistance to a public servant
in the execution of his or her public duty shall refuse to so render
such assistance.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of disobedience to order: (1) No person shall disobey
an order made by a competent authority in accordance with law, by
omitting to do anything ought to be done under law or doing
anything prohibited by law.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the lapse of three
months from the date of knowledge of the commission of any
offence under Section 78, 80 or 83 and from the date of the
commission of any offence under the other Sections of this Chapter.
Chpater-4
Offences against Public Justice
Prohibition of fabricating evidence: (1) Except as otherwise
provided in this Act, no person shall fabricate evidence, cause any
circumstance to exist, forge any document or electronic record or
make any false entry in any document or electronic record, with
intent to use it in a judicial or other legal proceeding.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
Provided that where a sentence of imprisonment for life has
been imposed on any person on the basis of such false evidence, the
offender shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no sentence shall be so imposed under this Section that the
sentence is in excess of the maximum sentence that can be imposed
on the offence in relation to which the evidence has been fabricated.
Prohibition of making or issuing false certificate: (1) No person
with authority or duty under law to submit, certify, authenticate or
issue a certificate or submit an affidavit in relation to any matter
shall submit, certify, authenticate or issue such certificate or submit
such affidavit, knowingly setting down a false statement in such
certificate or affidavit.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
Prohibition of using false evidence or certificate: (1) No person
shall, knowing that any evidence or certificate is false, use, or cause
to be used, as true such false evidence or certificate.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Prohibition of destroying document: (1) No person who is under a
legal duty to produce any document or electronic record as evidence
in a judicial or other legal proceeding shall knowingly destroy,
obliterate, render illegible such document or record, or otherwise
make it incapable of being used as evidence.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
No person shall, in contravention of law, knowingly
destroy, obliterate, render illegible any document or electronic record
produced in any judicial or other legal proceeding or otherwise
making such document or record incapable of being used as evidence
or cause it to disappear illegally or give it to another person in an
unauthorized manner.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
If a public servant commits the offence referred to in
sub-section (1) or (3), he or she shall be liable to double the sentence
referred to in that sub-section.
Prohibition of concealing evidence of offence: (1) No person shall,
with intent to protect any offender, conceal or destroy any evidence
relating to the offense committed by the offender or render it
ineligible to be used as evidence.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Prohibition of obstructing the giving of information: (1) No
person shall restraint or otherwise obstruct or hinder a person who,
upon knowing that an offence has been committed or is about to be
committed, intends to give information or notice about such offence
to the police or competent authority.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of harboring offender: (1) No person shall knowingly
harbor an offender with intent to prevent him or her from being
apprehended or save him or her from a lawful sentence.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“offender” means a person who is suspected or accused of an offence
or convicted by a court of such offence.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as
follows:
Sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five
years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees
where that person has harbored the offender of an
offence punishable by imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding twenty years,
Sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees where that person has harbored the offender of
an offence punishable by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years,
Sentence of imprisonment or fine not exceeding one
fourth of the maximum term of imprisonment or amount
of fine or both the sentences imposable for the offence
where that person has harbored the offender of the
offence other than that mentioned in clause (a) or (b).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no offence referred to in this Section shall be considered to have
been committed where the offender's husband or wife or father,
mother, son, daughter, elder brother, younger brother, elder sister,
younger sister, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, granddaughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law or son-inlaw has harbored the offender.
Obligation to give information of commission of offence: (1) No
person under a legal duty to give information regarding any offence
shall, knowing that such offence has been or is going to be
committed, omit to give information of such offence or no person
who knows the commission of any offence shall intentionally give
false information about that offence.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of concealment of property or fraudulent claim to
property: (1) No person shall fraudulently conceal, transfer or
deliver to any person, or caused to be concealed, transferred or
delivered, any property, or right in such property, which is liable to
be forfeited, withheld, auctioned, sold or enforced or inventory of
which is to be taken pursuant to a decision of a court or competent
authority, intending thereby to prevent that property or right from
being so forfeited, withheld, auctioned, sold or enforced or make a
claim to such property or right therein.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of making false complaint: (1) No person shall, with
intent to injure or annoy any person, make a false claim or accusation
or give false information against such person before or to an
authority making judicial proceeding.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable half the
maximum sentence imposable for the offence in respect of which
such false accusation has been made.
Provided that the provision of this Section shall not apply to
any case in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff.
Where the offence referred to in sub-section (1) has
resulted in any kind of harm or loss to a person who is a victim of
such offence, compensation for such harm or loss shall be recovered
from the offender to the victim.
Prohibition of making investigation or prosecution maliciously:
(1) No authority responsible by law for making investigation or
prosecution shall make investigation or prosecution maliciously,
with intent to have an innocent person bear liability or to save the
real offender.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Where any person suffers any kind of harm or loss from
the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall be entitled
to get compensation from such offender.
100. Prohibition of failure to appear in violation of terms and
conditions of guarantee: (1) No person who has been charged with
an offence and released on guarantee shall fail, without a reasonable
cause, to appear in the office or court to which guarantee is given in
accordance with the terms and conditions of such guarantee.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “guarantee”
means cash, bank guarantee or personal guarantee.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
Where a person who fails to so appear under this
Section is convicted of the offence with which he or she has been
charged shall be liable to the additional sentence under this Section,
in addition to the sentence imposable on him or her for such offence.
Where a person who is released on personal guarantee
in accordance with law fails to appear in the office or court in
accordance with such guarantee, the person giving such guarantee
shall be liable to a sentence of fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
A person who has been sentenced under this Section
shall not be eligible to become a surety without security until three
years.
101. Prohibition of obstructing apprehension or escaping from
custody: (1) No person for whose apprehension an arrest warrant has
been issued shall knowingly make any obstruction, by using force, in
the course of apprehension or to the apprehension of himself or
herself or to escape from apprehension if already apprehended or no
person who is lawfully detained in custody shall escape or attempt to
escape from such custody.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
102. Prohibition of obstructing apprehension or rescuing from
custody: (1) No person shall intentionally make obstruction in the
course of apprehension of or to the apprehension of any other person
for whose apprehension an arrest warrant has been issued in
accordance with law or rescue such other person from apprehension
if already apprehended or intentionally escape or aid in the escape of
a person who is lawfully detained in custody from such custody.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
If any public servant commits or causes to be committed
the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall be liable to
double the sentence specified in sub-section (2).
103. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences referred to in

Section 101 or 102.
No complaint shall lie after the lapse of three months
from the date of commission of the offence under Section 100 and
from the date of knowledge of the commission of any of the other
offences under this Chapter.

Chapter-5
Offences against Public Interest, Health, Safety,
Convenience and Morals
104. Prohibition of spreading infectious disease: (1) No person shall do
any act that spreads or is likely to spread any kind of infectious
disease which is dangerous to life of any one.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, if the offence has been
committed intentionally or knowingly, to a sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees, if the offence has been committed recklessly, and to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and
a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees, if the offence has been
committed negligently.
105. Prohibition of transmitting human immuno-deficiency virus
(HIV positive): (1) No person, knowing that his or her own body or
any other's body contains human immuno-deficiency virus (HIV
positive) or the virus of Hepatitis B, shall with intent to transmit such
disease to another person, donate his or her blood to such person or
cause the donation of such other person's blood or have sexual
intercourse with any one without taking any kind of precaution or
transfuse in any way his or her or such person's blood, semen, saliva,
sputum or human organ into other's body.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
Provided that where such disease has got transmitted with
negligence or recklessness, failing any intent to transmit it, the
offender shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
Where the victim himself or herself has solicited and
established sexual intercourse with a person having the human
immuno-deficiency virus or the virus of Hepatitis B, the person
having the infection of such virus shall not be considered to have
committed the offence referred to in this Section.
106. Prohibition of violating law relating to communicable disease: (1)
No person shall violate any rule, directive or order relating to
communicable diseases issued by the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level or the competent authority under law.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that where any violation of such rule, directive or
order is likely to cause the death of a person, the offender shall be
liable to the sentence under Section 104.
107. Prohibition of adulteration of food: (1) No person shall produce
any food or drink to be consumed by the public by mixing into it any
injurious substance that is inedible, undrinkable or inconsumable or
any substance that is edible, drinkable or consumable but
substandard or any injurious chemical substance, or sell or distribute
it or sell or distribute any food of which expiry date has expired or
which is adulterated or sell, distribute, import or offer for sale or
distribution any food of standard falling short of the prescribed
standard or inedible substance.
Any person who commits, or causes to be committed,
the offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence
of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
108. Prohibition of selling, distributing food by misrepresentation: (1)
No person shall sell or distribute any food, lying or misrepresenting
that it is a different food or that a food which is of low quality or
inedible is a food of high quality, or mixing any food substance of
low standard or inedible food substance into any food substance of
high quality
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
109. Prohibition of selling or distributing goods by misrepresentation:
(1) No person shall sell any low quality good, except food, by
misrepresenting that such good is original one or any good by
causing to believe that it is a different good or any good so
adulterated as to degrade its quality or change a label on any good or
sell any good of which the date of expiry has expired.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
110. Prohibition of hoarding consumable goods intended for sale: (1)
No person shall increase the price of any consumable goods by
creating an artificial shortage of such goods in the market or sell, or
cause to be sold, such goods at higher price or dump, store or hoard
such goods by refraining from selling such goods with the motive of
making undue profit from the sale of such goods.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
111. Prohibition of fouling water: (1) No person shall foul the water to
be consumed by the public or the water of any public spring so as to
render it unfit for drinking or foul the water to be used for any
purpose other than drinking so as to render it unfit for that purpose.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence as
follows:
(a) Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a
fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of a person who fouls, or causes
to be fouled, drinking water or its spring,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a
fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of a person who fouls, or causes
to be fouled, water to be used for other purpose.
112. Prohibition of polluting environment: (1) No person shall
generate, transmit, release or stockpile wastages in such a manner as
to cause significant adverse impact on the environment.
No person shall cause pollution in such a manner as to
cause injury to public health or danger to body or life of the public,
or generate, transmit, emit or stockpile, sound, heat or radioactive
wave or hazardous waste, as the case may be, from a mechanical
device.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (2) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
113. Prohibition of causing danger or obstruction in public way, river
or place: (1) No person shall, by doing any act or by omitting to take
order with or maintain any property of him or her or under his or her
control or charge, cause danger, obstruction or hindrance to any one
in any public way, river or other public place.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of a
fine not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees.
114. Prohibition of reckless conduct in using toxic or explosive
substance: (1) No person shall do, in the operation or with the use of
any explosive substance or fire or inflammable substance, explosive
substance or deadly weapon or machine, any act so recklessly as to
endanger or to be likely to cause injury to human body or life or
knowingly or recklessly omit to make such arrangement with such
substance of him or her or under his or her possession or charge as is
necessary to prevent any probable danger to human life.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
115. Prohibition of recklessness conduct with respect to constructing,
demolishing or repairing buildings: (1) No person shall, in
constructing, demolishing or repairing a building, knowingly or
recklessly omits to take such arrangement with that building as is
necessary to guard against or prevent any probable danger to cause
death of or grievous hurt to any one from such act or from the fall or
collapse of that building or any part thereof.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
116. Prohibition of reckless conduct with respect to animals and
birds: (1) No person shall, in keeping or caring and cultivating any
violent or other animal or bird of him or her or under his or her
control or custody, knowingly or recklessly omits to take such
precautionary measure with that animal or bird as is necessary to
guard against or prevent any probable danger to cause death of or
grievous hurt to any one from such act or from such animal or bird.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
117. Prohibition of setting animal free: (1) No person shall set any
animal or bird of him or her or under his or her custody or control
free to other's house or land, public road or way or public place.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
118. Prohibition of indecent conduct: (1) No person shall enter into a
public place or any place where he or she has no legal right to enter
into and behave any one indecently or manhandle or annoy any
woman, child or person with physical disability in any public place
or attempt to do such act.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
119. Prohibition of soliciting prostitution: (1) No person shall solicit
prostitution.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
120. Prohibition of providing house, land to be used for prostitution
or sexual intercourse with prostitute: (1) No person shall
knowingly provide his or her house, land or means of transport for
the purpose of prostitution or having sexual intercourse with a
prostitute.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
121. Prohibition of producing or selling obscene books, pamphlets
etc: (1) No person shall commit any of the following acts, including
producing any obscene book, pamphlet publicly:
Producing, printing or publishing or circulating through
electronic media any obscene book, pamphlet, drawing,
film, picture, record or any other item which is
lascivious (increases physical libido) or appeals to the
prurient interest or makes characterless,
Purchasing, selling, distributing or letting to hire or
publicly exhibiting such obscene item or holding such
item with intent to do so,
Advertising that such obscene item is available from
any person in this way,
Exporting or importing or holding such obscene item
with intent to sell, distribute it.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the provision of this Section shall not apply to any work
which is in the interest of, or which is of importance from the
perspective of, science, education, art, literature, research or learning
or which is kept or made for a religious purpose.
122. Prohibition of showing sexual organ in public place: (1) No
person above ten years of age shall, except for the purpose of
medical sciences or treatment, do any obscene act or conduct or
show his or her sexual organ or utter or make any obscene words or
gesture to any one in a public place.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
123. Prohibition of having sexual intercourse in public place: (1) No
person shall have sexual intercourse with any one or any kind of
unnatural sexual intercourse in a public place, or in any other place
in a manner that such intercourse is visible to others.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
124. Prohibition of committing public nuisance: (1) Except as
otherwise provided in a law, no person shall do any act or omit to do
any act legally required to be done, which causes any kind of harm,
injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people who dwell
in the vicinity.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of fine not exceeding twentyfive thousand rupees.
125. Prohibition of gambling or betting: (1) No person shall gamble or
cause gambling.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the sentence as follows:
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of one who gambles or causes
any one to gamble for the first time,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
the case of one who gambles or causes any one to
gamble for the second time, and additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months and a fine not exceeding
ten thousand rupees for every subsequent offence.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act,-
"gambling" means a game or process of any type
to be so played by betting as to gain, lose or win
any kind of movable or immovable property or
return, on the basis of contingency, and this term
also includes any betting or waging so made by
one who does not gamble himself or herself as to
gain or lose any movable, immovable property or
return depending on the win or loss of others.
Provided that any of the following games
or programs shall not be considered to be
gambling:
A game so played, with the approval of the
Government of Nepal, for entertainment in
a public ceremony, fair, feast, festival,
exhibition or event that a small amount of
movable property is won or lost,
A lottery operated with the approval of the
authorized authority.
"one who causes any one to gamble" means a
person who causes gambling by knowingly
providing a house, room, space or vehicle under
his or her ownership, possession, use or custody
or by providing any kind of instrument for
gambling.
All instruments used for gambling and movable and
immovable properties earned from gambling shall be forfeited.
Provided that a house, room, place or means of transport
where gambling has taken place shall not be forfeited.
No person shall bet or cause betting.
For the purposes of sub-section (4), a person who so
bets that he or she will receive or lose any movable, immovable
property or consideration if any particular party wins or loses any
game or process that can be played, or caused to be played, under
law shall be considered to have committed the offence of betting.
In the event of commission of the offence referred to in
sub-section (4), the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees, along with the forfeiture of the
claimed amount used in the offence.
Convictions pronounced by a court shall be taken into
account for the purpose of establishing recidivism in relation to the
offence referred to in this Section.
126. Prohibition of soliciting alms (begging) or causing begging: (1)
No person shall solicit alms (begging) in a public place or use a child
for the purposes of begging under the pretense of singing, dancing,
playing or doing any act or use other person for purposes of begging,
in return for any kind of money or wages paid by him or her to that
other person, or abet begging.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the sentence as follows and the claimed
amount of begging shall also be forfeited:
(a) Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or a
fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, in the case of
begging for the first time, and imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two months or a fine not exceeding two
thousand rupees for every instance, from the second
instance onwards,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of causing begging for the first
time, and imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees or
both the sentences for every instance, from the second
instance onwards.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
begging by a sage, saint, hermit or monk visiting
home to home as per the tradition practiced from
time immemorial or begging in any religious or
cultural work shall not be considered to be an
offence under this Section,
"public place" means any road, street, park, motor
vehicle stop, government office or office
premises, and this term also includes a means of
transport in public use.
127. Compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is caused to any
one or any property of any one from any of the offences referred to
in Sections 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 113, 114, 115,
116, 117, 118 and 124 of this Chapter, compensation shall be
ordered to be paid by the offender to the person who so suffers such
harm or loss.
128. Statute of limitation: (1) In the case of any offence under this
Chapter which has caused the death of any one, there shall be no
statute of limitation for making a complaint in relation to such
offence.
No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three months
after the date of commission of any of the offences under Sections
113,114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 and 122 and after the
expiry of six months from the date of knowledge of commission of
any of the other offences under this Chapter.

Chapter-6
Offences Relating to Arms and Ammunitions
129. Prohibition of manufacturing arms without obtaining license: (1)
No person shall manufacture or repair arms and ammunition without
obtaining a license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and
restrictions specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act,-
"arms" means a canon, mortar, tank, machine gun, rifle,
gun, pistol, revolver or other device of similar nature to
be operated by using or not using ammunition, and this
term also includes spare parts of and machinery and
equipment for manufacturing any arms,
"machine gun" means a brain gun, luis gun, stain gun,
machine, carbine, toms machine carbine, GMG, short
machine gun or automated arms of similar nature, and
this term also includes a machine, equipment for
manufacturing a machine gun, and spare parts thereof.
"ammunition" means gun powder, cape, bullet, shell,
detonator, cartoos, fuse or other substance of similar
nature to be placed in arms.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, according to the gravity of
the risks of arms or ammunition in question.
130. Prohibition of transaction of arms without obtaining license: (1)
No person shall transact arms and ammunition without obtaining a
license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and restrictions
specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, "transaction"
means procurement, sale, transport, obtaining ownership, transfer,
accumulating, stockpiling or collection, storage, export or import.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
131. Prohibition of acquisition of specific type of arms: (1) No person
shall acquire the following arms, by way of procurement, sale,
donation, gift, reward, partition, succession or otherwise, retain,
stockpile or store such arms, or use, transport, export or import such
arms except with the order of the competent authority:
A tank and ammunition thereof,
A cannon or mortar and ammunition thereof,
A machine gun and ammunition thereof,
Any kind of rifle and ammunition thereof,
Such other arms and ammunition thereof as specified by
the competent authority that such arms and ammunition
are prohibited from being acquired or held by the
public.
A person who acquires any arms set forth in sub-section
(1) shall, within thirty-five days from the date of acquisition thereof,
surrender such arms to the concerned District Administration Office.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, nothing shall be deemed to bar any officer and personnel of
the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal
concerned with security work or other security personnel who are
entitled to use arms lawfully from holding or using such arms in the
course of discharging their respective duties.
132. Prohibition of retaining or carrying arms without license: (1) No
person shall acquire, retain, stockpile, use or carry such arms as may
be allowed by law to be acquired, held, stockpiled, used or carried,
without obtaining a license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms
and restrictions specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Provided that nothing shall bar any officer and personnel of
the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal
concerned with security work or other security personnel who are
entitled to use arms lawfully from holding, using or carrying such
arms in the course of discharging their respective duties.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
133. Obligation to maintain records of transaction of arms,
ammunition: (1) A person who carries out transaction of arms or
ammunition by obtaining a license shall maintain separate records of
the arms and ammunition transacted by him or her.
The records maintained pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
set out, inter alia, the following matters:
Type, description and quantity of the arms
procured
sold,
transported,
stockpiled,
exported or imported by him or her,
In the case of a sale of arms to any one, the
purchaser’s name, surname, address, citizenship
or passport number, date and place of issue of
citizenship certificate or passport,
A person who carries out the transaction of arms or
ammunition shall, when so asked, show the records referred to in
sub-section (2) to the authority controlling or administering arms and
ammunition, the investigating authority or a court.
Where any person other than one who carries out the
commercial transaction of arms or ammunition by obtaining a license
intends to carry out the transaction of arms and ammunition, he or
she shall obtain approval of the concerned District Administration
Office to that effect.
A person who does, or causes to be done, any act
contrary to sub-section (1), (3) or (4) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
134. Prohibition of production or transaction of nuclear, chemical,
biological (bacteriological) or toxin weapons: (1) No person shall
manufacture, produce, procure, sell, acquire, own, transfer, stockpile,
store, transport, export or import, invest in or manage any type of
nuclear, chemical, biological (bacteriological) or toxic weapons or
cause any one to do so.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
"chemical weapon" means any chemical weapon as
defined by the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and their Destruction, done at Paris
on 13 January 1993.
"biological or toxin weapon" means any biological
(bacteriological) or toxin weapon as defined by the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production
Stockpiling
Bacteriological
(Biological) and Toxin Weapons and their Destruction,
done at London, Moscow and Washington on 10 April,
1972.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding twenty years and a fine not exceeding two hundred
thousand rupees.
135. Forfeiture of movable, immovable property related to offence: In
the event of the commission of any offence under this Chapter, the
arms and ammunition related to such offence, and machinery,
equipment, instrument or vehicle producing, manufacturing,
retaining or transporting such arms and proceeds of the sale and
purchase of such arms or ammunition and amount accrued or
accumulated therefrom shall be forfeited.
Provided that where the owner of the means of transport or
motor vehicle proves that he or she did not know the transportation
of such arms and ammunition, such means of transport or vehicle
shall not be forfeited.
136. Compensation caused to be paid: Where any harm or loss is
caused to any one's body or property from the commission by any
person of any offence under this Chapter, a reasonable compensation
for such harm or loss shall be caused to be paid by the offender to the
victim.
137. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in relation to an
offence under Section 132, after the expiry of three months of the
commission of such offence, and in relation to any of the other
offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of six months from the
date of knowledge of the commission of such offence.

Chapter-7
Offences Relating to Explosives
138. Prohibition of production of explosives: (1) No person shall make,
prepare or produce any kind of explosives without obtaining a
license or in a manner to be contrary to the terms and restrictions
specified in the license, even if, obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Act:,-
"explosives” means I.E.D., T.N.C. Amatol, Barotol,
Pentolite, rapid detonative explosive (RDX), tore fex,
blastic explosives, dynamite, gun powder, nitroglycerin,
gelignite, stemite, selsite, detonator, blastic cap,
electronic blastic cap, fuse, fireworks, cracker, gun
cotton, gun powder, ballistic powder, mercury or
fullunet made of any other metal, any other explosive
substance of similar nature, which is capable of
exploding and causing loss, or any substance so
specified by the Government of Nepal by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette, and this term also includes a
bomb.
"bomb" means a grenade so made of any explosive or
any means, formula, process or measure as to selfdetonate or detonate with the help of other substance, or
other object containing explosive or substance of similar
nature.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years
and a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand
rupees, in the case of high explosives,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years
and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in
the case of low explosives,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of ordinary explosives,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years
and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees,
in the case of a person who produces, uses,
retains or otherwise transacts any equipment,
machinery or instrument for producing or
manufacturing explosives.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"high explosives" means dynamite, nitroglycerin,
TNC, gelignite mornqtarlab, mercury fullunet,
R.D.X.
amatol,
barotol,
pentolite,
stemite,
selsightal, blastic explosive bomb and other
explosive of similar nature.
explosives"
means
blastic
powder,
gunpowder, gun cotton, mercury or fullunet made
of any other metal and other explosive of similar
nature.
"ordinary explosives" means detonator, blastic
cap, electronics blastic cap, fuse, firework,
cracker and other explosives of similar nature.
139. Prohibition of transaction of explosives: (1) No person shall
transact explosives without obtaining a license or in a manner to be
contrary to the terms and restrictions specified in the license, even if,
obtained.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"transaction" means procurement, sale, retention, use, stockpiling,
storage, transport, alteration, mixing, export or import.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a
fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, in the
case of high explosives,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees, in the case of
low explosives,
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a
fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees, in the case of
ordinary explosives.
140. Prohibition of making or using artificial explosives: (1) No
person shall alter or modify any ordinary consumable goods to be
used or consumed by the public or physical or chemical characters of
such goods, through any physical or chemical process, formula,
measure or method or change the form, structure or shape thereof,
and use or caused to be used, the same as a bomb of any type or any
other explosives.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
141. Prohibition of making land mines or laying explosives: (1) No
person shall lay or place any explosive, any inflammable substance
or making an electronic ambush in a public road or way, place,
building, bridge, tunnel or any other place for the public movement
or cause obstruction to the movement or use of any other public
utilities by placing such substance or making an ambush.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
Where any injury or loss is caused to the body, life or
property of any one from the commission of the offence referred to
in sub-section (1), the sentence referred to in -sub-section (2) shall be
added to the sentence which is imposable by this Act on the offender
for such injury or loss.
142. Obligation to maintain records of production or transaction: (1)
A person who has obtained a licence for the production or
transaction of explosives shall, in producing, manufacturing,
preparing or transacting such explosives, maintain separate records
of every production or transaction of every explosive.
The records referred to in sub-section (1) shall set out,
inter alia, the following matters:
Type, description and quantity of the explosives
produced, prepared or manufactured,
In the case of the transaction of explosives, the
purpose for which such transaction has been made,
In the case of the sale and distribution of explosives,
the purchaser’s name, the purpose, and quantity of,
such sale and distribution.
A person who carries out the transaction of explosives
shall, when so asked, show the records referred to in sub-section (1)
to the competent authority controlling or administering explosives,
the investigating or prosecuting authority or the court.
A person who does, or causes to be done, any act
contrary to this Section shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
143. Obligation to take care while importing, transporting or
stockpiling explosives: (1) A person who licensed to carry out the
transaction of explosives shall, in using, carrying, transporting or
stockpiling such explosives, so use such explosives as to ensure
adequate safety according to the nature of such explosives or carry,
transport or stockpile such explosives, having kept them in
appropriate magazines.
A person who does, or causes to be done, any act
contrary to sub-section (1) shall be liable to a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees.
144. Forfeiture of movable or immovable property related to offence:
In the event of the commission of any offence referred to in this
Chapter, any explosives related to such offence, goods, equipment,
instrument or raw materials used for producing, preparing or
manufacturing such explosives, motor vehicle or means of transport
used in the transportation or carriage of such explosives and
proceeds of the production, preparation, manufacturing or transaction
of such explosives and amount accrued or accumulated therefrom
shall be forfeited.
Provided that where the owner of the motor vehicle or means
of transport proves that he or she did not know the transportation of
the explosives, such vehicle or means of transport shall not be
forfeited.
145. Order for compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is
caused to the life, or any property, of any one from the commission
by a person of any of the offences under this Chapter, reasonable
compensation for such harm or loss shall be ordered to be paid by the
offender to the victim.
146. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of any of the offences under

Section 143 and after the expiry of six months from the date of
knowledge of commission of any of the other offences under this
Chapter.

Chapter-8
Offences against National and Public Heritages
147. Prohibition of owning public building, land by individual: (1) No
person shall, without prior approval of the Government of Nepal or
State Government or Local Level, obtain ownership of the following
building or land, whether making its registration or not, or otherwise
occupy, cultivate or encroach, or hinder or obstruct, in any way, the
possession or use of, such building or land:
Any government building or land held in the name of
the Government of Nepal, State Government or Local
Level or a public body under the full or majority
ownership or control of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level,
Any community or public house or land which has been
under community or public possession and use from
time immemorial.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, an
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty
thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Where any building, land mentioned in sub-section (1)
has already been registered in, or transmitted to, the name of any
individual, such registration or transmission also shall, ipso facto, be
void.
148. Prohibition of owning public heritage by individual: (1) No
person shall obtain the ownership of any public heritage, whether
making its registration or not, or hinder or obstruct, in any way, the
public possession or use of, or otherwise occupy, cultivate or
encroach such heritage, or cause harm, loss or damage to such
heritage in any way.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public heritage” means any of the following heritages:
A right of way that has been in public use from
time immemorial,
A road, pasture land, water body, graveyard,
crematory, water tap, spout, well, pond, edge of
pond, spring of drinking water, canal, water
channel, meadow for animal grazing or exit for
animals, that has been in the public use,
A place where market is held,
A divine place, shrine, temple, Stupa, monastery,
mosque or church,
A public rest house, Pauwa, Sattal, Chautaro,
historical
statue,
monument,
cultural
monument or memorial,
A place for organizing religious or cultural
functions or ceremonies,
A national forest designated by the Government
of Nepal or forest, or any part thereof, under
ownership of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Where any public heritage referred to in sub-section (1)
has already been registered in, or transmitted to, the name of any
individual, such registration or transmission also shall, ipso facto, be
void.
149. Prohibition of encroachment of natural heritages: (1) No person
shall, except in accordance with law, encroach or possess, in any
way, any natural heritage, or sell or distribute such heritage, or cause
any harm, loss or damage to its natural structure or beauty, in any
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“natural heritage” means any of the following heritages:
A national park, wildlife or hunting reserve designated
by the Government of Nepal for the protection of the
natural environment, vegetation and wildlife,
A conservation area designated by the Government of
Nepal, river, rivulet, stream, lake, wetland or natural
water-fall, snow-peak or any part thereof, higher
mountain peak,
A wildlife, vegetation or landscape protected by the law
in force or the Government of Nepal, State Government
or Local Level,
A habitat of wildlife protected by the Government of
Nepal, State Government or Local Level, eco-system, or
any medicinal herb which is prohibited for sale,
distribution, export or import.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine equal to
the claimed amount if such amount is specified and a fine not
exceeding one million rupees if such amount is not specified or both
the sentences.
150. Prohibition of possession or destruction of public physical
infrastructure in unauthorized manner: (1) No person shall,
except in accordance with law, possess, in an unauthorized manner,
any public physical infrastructure or prevent any one from using
such infrastructure, or, cause any harm or loss to such infrastructure,
in any way.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public physical infrastructure” means the following infrastructure to
be publicly used:
A road, way, bridge, tunnel, airport,
A water reservoir, canal, spring of drinking water, and
pond, power house, electricity transmission center or
line thereof,
A ropeway, cable car, telecommunication equipment,
radio station, television broadcasting center and tower
thereof,
A rail and railway;
A public bus station, public park, or
Similar other structure.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
151. Prohibition of dishonoring or destroying national anthem, flag
or coat-of-arms: (1) No person shall, with intention to spread hatred
against Nepal or the Government of Nepal, dishonor the national
anthem of Nepal, burn, or knowingly dishonor, the flag of Nepal, or
use such anthem, flag or coat-of-arms of Nepal at such place, on
such object or condition as it is not appropriate for its use in view of
public morality, decency or courtesy.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
No person shall, with intent to spread hatred against, or
dishonor a country with which Nepal has friendly relation, burn or
knowingly misuse such country's national flag or misuse such flag or
the coat-of-arms of such country or use such flag or coat-of-arms at
such place, on such object or condition as it is not appropriate for its
use in view of public morality, decency or courtesy.
No person shall, with intent to make hatred against or dishonor the
United Nations Organization or any organization associated with, or
specialized agency of, the United Nations Organization or any
international or regional organization of which Nepal is a member,
misuse in any way the flag or emblem of such Organization, or use
such flag or logo, motor vehicle or other object of such Organization
without approval of such Organization.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) or (4) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine
not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
152. Not to insult national figures/heroes: (1) No person shall
knowingly make hatred against, dishonor or defame, any national
figure/hero specified by the Government of Nepal or demolish,
cause loss or damage to the statue, monument or memorial of such
figure/hero.
Provided that any comment made in good faith in the context
of a study, research or evaluation of the life of such figure/hero shall
not be considered to be an offence referred to in this Section.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
153. Order for compensation to be paid: Where any harm or loss is
caused from the commission of any offence referred to in Section
150, reasonable compensation for such harm or loss shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender.
154. Statute of limitation: There shall be no statute of limitation for
filing a complaint in relation to any of the offences under Sections
147, 148 and 149, and no complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of commission of any of the offences under the
other Sections of this Chapter.

Chapter-9
Offences Relating to Religion
155. Prohibition of injuring shrines or places held sacred: (1) No
person shall damage or injure or, in any way, defile, destroy or
pollute any place of religious worship, pray or function or place,
object held sacred or burial place or place of sepulture or do similar
other act with intent to outrage or insult the religion or religious
feelings of any caste, race, community or class or with the
knowledge that such outrage or insult is likely to occur.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Where a foreigner has committed, or caused to be
committed, the offence referred to in sub-section (1), he or she shall
be deported from Nepal within seven days after the date of
completion of the service of imprisonment under sub-section (2).
156. Prohibition of outraging religious feelings: (1) No person shall
outrage the religious feelings of any caste, race, community or class
by words, either spoken or written, by visible representation or signs
or otherwise.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years and a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees.
157. Prohibition of causing obstruction to religious rites and rituals:
(1) No person shall knowingly cause obstruction to other's religious
rites and rituals that are handed down or being followed from the
time immemorial.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
158. Prohibition of proselytizing: (1) No person shall convert any one
from one religion to another or make attempt to or abet such conversion.
No person shall do any act or conduct which
undermines the religion, opinion or faith of any caste, race,
community or convert any one into another religion, whether by
inducement or not, in a manner to so undermine or propagate such
religion or opinion with the intention of making such conversion.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
If a foreigner commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2), he or she shall be
deported from Nepal within seven days after the date of completion
of the service of imprisonment imposed under this Section.
159. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence
under Section 158 and from the date of commission of any of the
other offences under this Chapter.
Chpater-10
Offences Relating to Discrimination and Other Degrading Treatment
160. Prohibition of making discriminatory treatment: (1) Except as
otherwise provided by laws, no authority who exercises power under
law shall, in the exercise of such power or a general law,
intentionally make a discriminatory treatment against any citizen on
grounds of origin, religion, color, caste, race, sex, physical condition,
disability, condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic
condition, language or region, ideology or on similar other grounds.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
161. Prohibition of purchasing, selling or distributing goods or
service with discrimination: (1) No person, in purchasing, selling or
distributing any goods or services, shall purchase, sell or distribute
such goods or services from or to only any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community or omit to provide, sell or
distribute such goods or services to any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community.
Provided that where a person, with the approval of the
competent authority under law, provides, sells or distributes any
particular goods or services to only any person belonging to any
particular caste, race or community, for the protection of interest and
development of a class which is economically, socially or
educationally backward, such person shall not be considered to have
committed the offence under this Section.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
162. Prohibition of forced labour: (1) No person shall force any one to
work against his or her will.
Provided that this Section shall not be deemed to bar the
engaging of any one in labor for a public work in accordance with
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
163. Prohibition of slavery: (1) No person shall subject any one to
slavery or servitude or hold or employ him or her in such status or
subject, or cause to be subjected, him or her to any other kind of
treatment similar thereto.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of five to ten years and a fine of fifty
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.
164. Prohibition of serfdom or debt bonded labour: (1) No person shall
subject any one to, or hold any one in, serfdom or debt bonded
labour for any kind of consideration or employ any one in the status
of serfdom or bonded labour, or subject, or cause to be subjected,
him or her to any other kind of treatment similar thereto.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term from three to seven years and a fine from
thirty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees.
165. Prohibition of undermining social rites and rituals: (1) No person
shall, by way of misrepresentation or use of force, do, or cause to be
done, any act which undermines or results in the undermining of the
social rites and rituals of any one.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, any rites and
rituals constituting racial discrimination shall not be considered to be
social rites and rituals.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
166. Prohibition of untouchability or discriminatory treatment on
ground of caste: (1) No person shall subject any one to
untouchability or any other kind of discrimination, or prevent any
one from appearing in any public place or entering into any religious
place of public nature, or deprive any one of using water or water
pond in public use or of the use of things of any other private or
public utility or convenience, on the grounds of custom, tradition,
religion, culture, rites or rituals, caste, race, community, profession,
occupation, physical condition or origin of social community.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences, and if a
public servant commits the offence referred to in this Section, he or
she shall be liable to an additional sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding three months.
167. Prohibition of torture: (1) No authority who is competent under the
law in force to investigate or prosecute any offence, implement law,
take any one into control, or hold any one in custody or detention in
accordance with law shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any one
to physical or mental torture or to cruel, brutal, inhuman or
degrading treatment.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, intentional
inflicting of physical or mental pain or suffering on any person who
is arrested, taken into control, held in custody, detention or
imprisonment or under preventive detention or security or any other
person interested in such person or subjecting such person to cruel,
brutal, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment for the
following purpose shall be considered to constitute torture or cruel,
brutal, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment against or to
such person:
To get information on any matter,
To extort confession of any offence,
To punish for any act,
To show fear, intimidation or coercion, or
To do any other act contrary to law.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, according to the gravity of the offence.
A person who orders the commission of the offence
referred to in sub-section (1) or an accomplice who aids in the
commission of the offence referred to in this Section shall be liable
to the same sentence as is imposable on the principal offender.
No person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be allowed to plea that he or she has committed the
offence in pursuance of an order by the authority superior to him or
her; and, on such ground, he or she shall not be exempted from the
sentence imposable on him or her for the commission of such
offence.
168. Prohibition of degrading or inhuman treatment: (1) No person
shall subject, or cause to be subjected, any one to degrading or
inhuman treatment.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the following
act shall be deemed to constitute a degrading or inhumane treatment:
To accuse one of being a witch,
To expel one from his or her place of residence in
accusation of being a witch,
To ex-communicate one from the society, or
To make cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment by
doing any other act whatsoever.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
Banishing a woman to a shed (Chhaupadi) during
menstruation or delivery, or subjecting, causing to be subjected, her
to similar other discrimination, untouchability or inhuman treatment
of any kind is prohibited.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding three thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Where a public servant commits the offence referred to
in this Section, he or she shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months.
169. Order for compensation to be paid: A reasonable compensation
for the injury or pain caused to the victim shall be ordered to be paid
by the person who has committed the offence referred to in this
Chapter.
170. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences referred to in
Sections 163 and 164.
No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months
from the date of commission of the offence referred to in Section 167
or from the date of release of the concerned person from arrest,
control, custody, detention, imprisonment or preventive detention
and from the date of knowledge of commission of any of the other
offences referred to in this Chapter.

Chapter-11
Offences Relating to Marriage
171. Prohibition of concluding marriage without consent: (1) No
marriage shall be concluded, or caused to be concluded, without the
consent of the persons getting married.
A marriage concluded without the consent referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be void.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, a consent given
by a person who has not attained the marriageable age under Section
173 shall not be deemed to be consent.
172. Prohibition of concluding marriage in prohibited degree of
relationship: (1) Except as otherwise customarily practiced, no
person shall conclude, or cause to be concluded, marriage with one
who is within the prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity
or affinity.
Where a marriage referred to in sub-section (1) has been
concluded in ignorance, such marriage shall be void.
Where a marriage referred to in sub-section (1) has been
concluded knowingly, the person concluding such marriage shall be
liable to the sentence imposable for the offence of incest and a
person causing the conclusion of such marriage shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a
fine not exceeding three thousand rupees or both the sentences, and
such marriage shall, ipso facto, be void.
173. Prohibition of concluding child marriage: (1) No marriage shall be
concluded or cause to be concluded unless parties to the marriage
have attained twenty years of age.
A marriage concluded in contravention of sub-section
(1) shall, ipso facto, be void.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
174. Prohibition of transacting property in marriage: (1) No marriage
shall be concluded, or caused to be concluded, upon having asked
for, or on the condition of receiving or giving of, any type of
movable or immovable property, dowry or any property from the
bridegroom or the bride side, except such ordinary gift, donation,
money or one set of jewelry worn on the body as has been practiced
in his or her custom.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
No person shall, after the conclusion of marriage, ask
the bride or her relative for any movable, immovable property or
dowry referred to in sub-section (1), or make, in any way, any
annoyance, harassment or inhuman or degrading treatment to the
bride or her relative for the reason that such movable, immovable
property or dowry has not been given.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
Where any property has been taken as mentioned in
sub-section (1) or (3), such property shall be returned to the
concerned person.
175. Prohibition of bigamy: (1) No married man shall, during the
continuation of the marital relationship, conclude another marriage.
No woman shall conclude marriage with a man
knowingly that he is already married.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1)
or (2), a man or woman may marry again if the husband and wife
have got separated upon making partition in accordance with law.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of one year to five years and a
fine of ten thousand to fifty thousand rupees.
The marriage referred to in sub-section (1) shall, ipso
facto, be void.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to have
effect on any marriage concluded in accordance with the law in force
for the time being prior to the commencement of this Act.
176. Statute of limitation: No complaint on any offence under this
Chapter shall lie after the expiry of three months from the date of
knowledge of the commission of the offence.

Chapter-12
Offences Relating to Human Body
177. Prohibition of doing act with the intention of causing death
(homicide): (1) No person shall intentionally kill, or do, or cause to
be done, any act causing the death of, another person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, even if a
person intentionally causes such serious bodily injury or hurt to
another person as is likely to cause the death of that other person but
that person does not die immediately but die subsequently in
consequence of that injury or hurt, the person shall be considered to
have killed that other person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence of
imprisonment for life.
178. Prohibition of doing act likely to cause death: (1) No person shall
do any act, with the knowledge that, or having reason to believe that,
such act is, in an ordinary course, likely to cause the death of another
person.
If a person dies in consequence of any act referred to in
sub-section (1), the offender shall be liable to the sentence of
imprisonment for life.
179. Prohibition of causing death by grave provocation or in heat of
passion: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 177 or
178, a person who causes the death of another person in any of the
following circumstances shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of ten to fifteen years and a fine of one
hundred thousand to one hundred fifty thousand rupees:
Where the offender, while being deprived of the power
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes
the death of the person who gave such provocation,
Provided that this clause shall not apply to the
following circumstance:
Where the offender is provoked by
anything done in obedience to the law or in
the exercise of the right of private defense
or anything done or intended to be done by
a public servant in the exercise of his or her
official duties,
Where the offender himself or herself gives
provocation to another with intent to do
harm to any one and anything done by that
other person upon being so provoked
causes the death of any person.
Where the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence exceeds the limit of such power
and causes the death of the person against whom he or
she is exercising such right of private defence,
Where death is caused instantly in the heat of passion
upon a sudden quarrel,
Provided that while doing any act referred to in
this clause, the offender must not have taken an undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses
(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the provisions contained in these
clauses shall not be applicable to any case of murder committed with
premeditation or deliberate afterthought.
180. Punishment for homicide by causing death of person other than
person whose death was intended: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Sections 177, 178 and 179, where a person, by doing
anything which he or she intends to cause or knows to be likely to
cause or has reason to believe to be likely to cause death of any one
other than the one whose death was so intended, he or she shall be
liable to the sentence set forth in Sections 177, 178 and179, as the
case may be.
181. Prohibition of causing death by recklessness: (1) No person shall
cause the death of any one by doing a reckless act.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall, except in the cases referred to in Sections 177, 178
and 179, be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of three
to ten years and a fine of thirty thousand to one hundred thousand
rupees.
182. Prohibition of causing death by negligence: (1) Except in the case
referred to in Section 179, no person shall cause the death of any one
by doing a negligent act.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
Except in the case referred to in sub-section (1), if any
act done by a person under such circumstances that such act is less
likely to cause death causes the death of any one accidently, that
person shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of six
months to two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
183. Prohibition of committing attempt to murder: (1) No person
shall, with the intention of committing murder of anyone, commit an
attempt to murder.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years and a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees.
184. Prohibition of throwing or abandoning person under one's own
guardianship: (1) A person, being bound to care or maintain an
infant, child, disabled patient or elderly person, shall not so throw,
abandon or desert as to cause danger to the body or life of such
infant, child, patient or elderly person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) causes the
death of such child, disabled patient or elderly person, the offender
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
Provided that if the throwing, abandonment or neglect causes
the death of an infant, the offender shall be liable to the sentence
referred to in Section 177.
185. Prohibition of abetment of suicide: (1) No person shall abet the
commission of suicide by another, or create, or cause to be created,
such circumstances as likely to lead towards the commission of such
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees.
186. Order for compensation to be paid: If any harm, injury or loss is
caused to the body, life or property of any person from the
commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter, a reasonable
compensation for such harm, injury or loss shall be ordered to be
paid by the offender to the victim and to his or her successor if the
victim is unavailable.
187. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to any of the offences under Sections
177, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, and proviso to sub-section (3) of

Section 184.
No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months
from the date of knowledge of the commission of any of the offences
under this Chapter other than those set forth in sub-section (1).

Chapter-13
Offences against Protection of Pregnancy
188. Prohibition of abortion: (1)
No person shall, except in the case
referred to in Section 189, commit abortion, or do any act with intent
to cause, or with the knowledge that, or having reason to believe that,
such act is likely to cause, abortion.
No person shall cause a pregnant woman to abort, by
coercing, threatening, alluring or inducing her to so abort.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) or (2) shall be liable to:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year and a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees in
the case of pregnancy of up to twelve weeks,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees in the case of pregnancy of more than twelve
weeks and up to twenty-five weeks,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees
in the case of pregnancy of more than twenty-five
weeks.
If the pregnancy is not terminated at once by an act of
abortion and the child born alive but the child dies immediately after
birth as the consequence of such act, such act shall, for the purposes
of this Section, be deemed to constitute the offence of abortion.
If an act done by a person in making attempt to cause
the death of a pregnant woman does not cause the death of the
woman but causes the termination of her pregnancy of twenty-five
weeks or more, the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, in addition to the
sentence to be imposed under this Act or other law.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if any act done by a person with premeditation against a
pregnant woman causes abortion, that person shall be liable to the
following sentence despite the fact that he or she has not done such
act with the intention of causing abortion:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year in the case of pregnancy of up to twelve weeks,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years in the case of pregnancy of more than twelve
weeks and up to twenty-five weeks,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years in the case of pregnancy of more than twentyfive weeks.
No person shall, with the intention of causing abortion,
do, or cause to be done, any act by which the sex of the foetus is
identified, and abort or cause abortion following such sex
identification.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (7) shall be liable to:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of three months
to six months, in the case of the offence of identifying,
or causing identification of, the sex of the foetus with
the intention of causing abortion, and
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year, in addition to the sentence specified in subsection (3), in the case of the offence of aborting or
causing abortion after identifying the sex.
189. When abortion can be made: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 188, where a health worker causes abortion in
any of the following circumstances, no offence of abortion under this
Act shall be deemed to have been committed:
The pregnancy of up to twelve weeks is terminated with
the consent of the pregnant woman,
The pregnancy is terminated with the consent of the
pregnant woman, upon the opinion of a licensed doctor
that her life may be in danger or her physical or mental
health may deteriorate or a handicapped child will born
if pregnancy is not terminated,
The pregnancy of up to eighteen weeks conceived from
rape or incest is terminated with the consent of the
pregnant woman,
The pregnancy of a woman with human immunedeficiency virus (HIV) or other incurable disease of
similar nature is terminated with her consent.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"health worker" means a doctor or health worker who, upon having
the specified qualification, has obtained a license for causing
abortion.
190. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six
months from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence
under this Chapter.

Chapter-14
Offences Relating to Hurt or Grievous Hurt
191. Prohibition of causing hurt: (1) No person shall cause hurt to
another person.
A person who does any of the following acts to another
person shall be deemed to cause hurt:
Any act by which any kind of bodily pain is caused,
Any act by which a disease is transferred,
Any other act by which infirmity is caused.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"infirmity" means the state of any part of the body being incapable of
functioning normally, and this term also includes mental infirmity.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
192. Prohibition of causing grievous hurt: (1) No person shall cause
grievous hurt to any other person.
Where any person does any act with the intention of
causing hurt to another person, which results in any of the following
consequences, that person is deemed to have committed the offence
of causing grievous hurt to that other person:
Making blind by making privation of the sight of, or by
breaking, either eye,
Privation of smelling power of the nose,
Privation of hearing power of either ear,
Privation of speaking power of the tongue,
Cutting of woman's breast,
Emasculation of man and woman (making woman
infertile or man impotent),
Privation of the backbone, …, hand, leg or joint of
such organ by breaking, fracturing, dislocating it,
Any hurt which causes the sufferer to be unable to
perform his or her professional work.
Where any act of hurt, though not causing grievous hurt
immediately, results subsequently in the consequence referred to in
sub-section (2), it shall be deemed to have caused grievous hurt.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
in the case of so causing grievous hurt to either of the organs
performing the same function that it becomes dysfunctional, the
offender shall be liable to half the sentence specified in that subsection, and where the wound caused by grievous hurt gets so healed
as to restore the organ, the offender shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
193. Prohibition of causing disfigurement by use of acid or other
chemical, biological or toxin substance: (1) No person shall cause
bodily pain to another person by administering acid or similar kind
of other chemical, biological or toxin substance to, or throwing such
substance on, that other person, or by burning, maiming, strolling the
body with or applying to the body such substance or disfigure the
face or any part of the body of that other person.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable, according to the nature of the offence, to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to eight years and a fine
of one hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees in the case
of disfigurement of the face, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term of three to five years and a fine of fifty thousand to three
hundred thousand rupees in the case of disfigurement of any other
organ of the body or bodily pain.
The amount of fine collected in accordance with subsection (2) shall be paid in whole to the victim as compensation.
194. Sentence for causing hurt or grievous hurt by grave provocation
or in heat of passion: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section 191 or 192, a person who causes hurt in any of the following
circumstances shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees or both the sentences in the case of a grievous hurt,
and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year
or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences in
the case of any other kind of hurt:
Where the offender, while being deprived of the power
of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes
hurt to the person who gave such provocation or to any
other person by a mistake of fact or happens to cause
injury to another person by accident.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to the
following circumstance:
Where the offender causes hurt upon being
provoked by anything done in obedience to
the law or in the exercise of the right of
private defence or any anything done or
intended to be done by a public servant in
the exercise of his or her official duties,
Where the offender himself or herself gives
provocation to another with intent to cause
any harm to any one and anything done by
that other person upon being so provoked
causes hurt to any person.
Where the offender in the exercise in good faith of the
right of private defence exceeds the limit of such power
and causes injury to any person,
Where hurt is caused to any person instantly in the heat
of passion upon a sudden quarrel,
Provided that while doing any act referred to in
this clause, the offender must not have taken an undue
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses
(b) and (c) of sub-section (1), the provisions contained in these
clauses shall not be applicable to any case of hurt or grievous hurt
caused with premeditation or deliberate afterthought.
195. Prohibition of causing hurt or grievous hurt by recklessness or
negligence: (1) No person shall cause hurt or grievous hurt or other
injury to any one by doing a reckless or negligent act.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of a grievous
hurt caused by a reckless act, and a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a
fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the
sentences, in the case of any other kind of injury caused
by a reckless act,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees
or both the sentences in the case of the commission of
such offence by a negligent act.
196. Prohibition of using criminal force: (1) No person shall use
criminal force to another person.
A person shall be considered to use criminal force to
another person if he or she does any of the following acts:
(a) To use any kind of force to that other person with the
intention of committing an offence,
(b) To use force to that other person with the intention of
causing, or knowing it to be likely that the use of such
force will cause, injury, fear or annoyance to that other
person or his or her family or property,
(c) To terrify that other person to apprehend that force will
be used to him or her or to threat or intimidate to use
force, or attempt to use force, in any other manner, to
him or her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the use of any force, with one's consent, in the course of
imparting teaching, instruction or training on the concerned subject,
conducting acting or treatment of any kind or in a manner to render
benefit or the use of force of usual nature in the course of having any
kind of game shall not be considered to be the use of criminal force.
Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall not apply
to any malicious use of force to cause injury to any one.
A person who uses, or causes to be used, criminal force
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees
or both the sentences, in the case of using criminal force by carrying
a weapon, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
both the sentences, in the case of using criminal force without
carrying a weapon.
197. Prohibition of making unconscious with intent to commit
offence: (1) No person shall, with intent to facilitate the commission
of any offence, feed or administer, in any other manner, to another
person any substance causing unconsciousness, dizziness or
unhealthiness or make that other person unconscious in any manner
whatsoever.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offense referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) has resulted
in the commission of such offence, the sentence referred to in this
Section shall be added to the sentence imposable for such offence.
198. Compensation: Where any harm, damage or loss is caused to any
person's body, life or property from the commission of the offence
referred to in this Chapter, compensation shall be caused to be paid
by the offender to the victim.
199. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in the case of the
offence referred to in Section 196, after the expiry of three months
from the date of its commission, in the case of the offence referred to
in Section 197, after the expiry of six months from the date on which
such person becomes conscious, and, in the case of any of the other
offences referred to in this Chapter, after the expiry of one year from
the date of its commission.

Chapter-15
Offences Relating to Unlawful Detention
200. Prohibition of unlawful confinement: (1) No person shall
maliciously subject, or cause to be subjected, another person to
detention in any other manner except in accordance with law.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
No one other than the competent authority shall
obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, the movement of any person.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
201. Prohibition of holding in detention without providing minimum
humane facilities: (1) No authority who is competent by law to
make detention shall detain, or cause to be detained, any person by
depriving him or her of such facilities as required to be provided in
accordance with law or of such minimum humane facilities as are
available in the place of his or her detention.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one and half years and a fine not exceeding fifteen
thousand rupees.
202. Prohibition of detaining person for whose release order has been
issued: (1) No person shall keep on detaining any person held in
detention in accordance with law after receiving an order issued by a
competent authority under law for the release of such person from
detention.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
203. Prohibition of detention in secret: (1) No competent authority shall
hold any person in detention secretly in such a manner that the
detention of such person or the place of such detention may not be
known or discovered.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
204. Order for compensation to be paid: A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid by the offender who commits, or causes
to be committed, the offence referred to in this Chapter to the victim.
205. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in the case of an
offence under sub-section (3) of Section 200, after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of such offence, and in the case
of any of the other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of
three months from the date of release of the detained person from
such detention.

Chapter-16
Offences Relating to Enforced Disappearance
206. Prohibition of enforced appearance: (1) No person shall subject,
or cause to be subjected, any one to enforced disappearance.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), the term "enforced
disappearance” means any of the following acts:
The arrest, detention or any other form of control of a
person by a person or security personnel having
authority by law to make arrest, investigation or
enforcement of law, followed by a failure to produce
such person before the case trying authority within
twenty-four hours of the date of such arrest or
deprivation of liberty, excluding the time required for
journey, or a refusal to allow the concerned person to
meet such person, and/or by concealment of information
as to where, how and in what condition such person has
been so held,
The abduction, custody, control or any other form of
deprivation of liberty of a person by any person,
organization or group, whether organized or not,
followed by concealment of information to the
concerned person as to the reason for such deprivation
and where, how and in what condition such person has
been so held,
A person who orders the commission of enforced
disappearance of a person upon arrest, detention or control of such
person and a person who implements such order shall be considered
to be the principal offender of enforced disappearance.
Where an act of enforced disappearance is committed in
pursuance of order or direction given by a person holding public
office or by the responsible person of an organization or group,
whether organized or unorganized, the person giving such order or
direction shall be liable as the principal offender of enforced
disappearance.
A superior who, despite knowing that his or her
subordinate official, body or group was committing or about to
commit an act of enforced disappearance, disregards such
information or fails to take necessary measures to prevent the
commission of such act shall also be considered to have committed
the offence under this Section.
Where a person has been subjected to enforced
disappearance by two or more persons jointly, every person involved
in such act shall be equally liable as the offender.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
In the case of the principal offender of enforced
disappearance, a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding fifteen years and a fine not
exceeding five hundred thousand rupees, having
regard to the duration and circumstances of such
enforced disappearance,
In the case of a person who is accomplice or
conspires to the commission of enforced
disappearance, the same sentence as is imposable
on the principal offender, and in the case of a
person who attempts to or facilitates the
commission of enforced disappearance, half the
sentence imposable on the principal offender.
A person who does an act constituting the offence
referred to in sub-section (1) against a woman or child shall be liable
to an additional sentence of imprisonment for a term of two years, in
addition to the sentence to be imposed pursuant to sub-section (7).
Where a person has committed any other offence
punishable by law against any one who has been subjected to
enforced disappearance, during such disappearance, he or she shall
be liable to the additional sentence under this Section, in addition to
the sentence imposable by law for such offence.
(10) A person who subjects any one to enforced
disappearance by using any government vehicle, building, arms and
ammunition or goods shall be liable to an additional sentence of
imprisonment for a term of one year, in addition to the sentence
imposable under this Section.
207. Forfeiture of goods related to offence: Any building, land, vehicle,
arms and other goods knowingly allowed by the owner thereof to be
used in, or used with the consent of the concerned owner in, the
commission of the offence punishable under this Chapter shall be
forfeited.
Provided that no governmental building, vehicle, arms and
goods shall be forfeited.
208. Entitlement to compensation: Where a person who is subjected to
enforced disappearance appears or is made public subsequently, he
or she shall be entitled to get a reasonable compensation from the
person who has so subjected him or her to enforced disappearance.
Where the person subjected to enforced disappearance
is already dead, the immediate successor to him or her shall be
entitled to get the compensation referred to in sub-section (1).
209. Property to be returned: Where any person, in subjecting another
person to enforced disappearance under this Chapter, has also taken
any property belonging to that other person, the person who has so
subjected to enforced disappearance shall return such property, if
available, and pay a reasonable compensation for such property, if
not available, to the disappeared person or his or her immediate
relative.
210. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall be entertained after expiry
of six months from the date of having knowledge of commission of
the offence under this Chapter or from the date of the disappeared
person getting or being made public.
Provided that if a complaint is filed, accompanied by the
evidence, with the leave of the court, setting out the reason for not
being in a position to file the complaint, such complaint may lie at
any time.

Chapter-17
Offences Relating to Kidnapping or Taking of Hostages
211. Prohibition of kidnapping: (1) No person shall kidnap, or cause to
be kidnapped, another person.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be
considered to have committed kidnapping if he or she does any of
the following acts:
To take any person to or compel him or her to go to any
place by using force or threats to use force or by
practicing fraud, deception or intimidation or by
showing or not showing arms or by misrepresenting or
by administering narcotics or alcoholic substance to him
or her or by seizing or controlling in any way a vehicle
by which he or she is travelling or exercising control in
any way over such vehicle, or
To take by force any person to any place without his or
her consent or any child or any person who is under
shelter of any one due to his or her physical incapacity
or any person of unsound mind due to mental illness
without the consent of his or her father, mother or
guardian or by way of misrepresentation.
212. Prohibition of hostage-taking: (1) No person shall take another
person hostage.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be
considered to have committed hostage-taking if that person seizes or
detains another person without his or her consent or a child or a
person of unsound mind without the consent of his or her father,
mother or guardian, by using force or threats to use force, or by
practicing fraud, deception, coercion or intimidation or by showing
or not showing arms or by misrepresenting or by administering
narcotics or alcoholic substance to him or her or by seizing or
controlling a vehicle or place where he or she is staying.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
placing, in good faith, an unsound person under the surveillance or
control of any one in the course of treatment or for any other
purpose, for the benefit of the concerned person, with the consent of
his or her father, mother or guardian shall not be deemed to
constitute hostage-taking.
213. Punishment for kidnapping or hostage-taking: A person who
does, or causes to be done, any act referred to in Section 211 or 212
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of seven to
ten years and a fine of seventy-five thousand to one hundred
thousand rupees if the person does, or causes to be done, such act
with the intention of causing death, causing injury by subjecting to
hurt, committing rape or unnatural sex, trafficking or enslaving, or
subjecting to forced labor, engaging into prostitution, subjecting to
torture, compelling to do or cause to be done any act, taking ransom
or compelling to do any other act which constitutes any offence
under the law in force, and to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
of three to five years and a fine of thirty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees if the person does, or causes to be done, such act for any other
purpose.
214. Additional sentence to be imposed: (1) A person who takes another
person hostage under Section 212 after kidnapping him or her under

Section 211 shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
of ten to fifteen years and a fine of one hundred thousand to one
hundred fifty thousand rupees.
A person who does any other act considered to be an
offence under this Act or under the law in force by committing
kidnapping or hostage-taking shall be liable to the sentence referred
to in sub-section (1), in addition to the sentence imposable for such
offence.
Where the offence referred to in Sections 211 and 212 is
committed, or cause to be committed, in an organized manner, the
persons committing such offence shall be liable to an additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term of two years.
215. Person who abets or orders or attempts or conspires or is
accomplice to be liable to sentence: (1) A person who abets or
orders the commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter shall
be liable to the same sentence as is imposable on the principal
offender.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the person who attempts or conspires to commit or is accomplice to
the commission of such act shall be liable to half the sentence
imposable for that offence.
216. Reduction of sentence if surrendered: Where a person committing
an offence under this Chapter surrenders before the security
personnel at the time of committing the offence or renders assistance
in arresting the other offenders or members of the gang committing
that offence, the court may, having regard to the circumstances,
reduce the sentence for that person.
217. Compensation ordered to be paid: (1) A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid to the victim by the person who is held to
have committed or caused the commission of any offence under this
Chapter.
The compensation referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
paid to the immediate successor to the victim if the victim is already
dead.
218. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in the case of any offence under this Chapter
which has caused the death of any one.
No complaint shall lie after the expiry of two years after
the date of commission of any offence under this Chapter other than
that set forth in sub-section (1), and after the expiry of six months
after the date of release of the concerned person from such offence in
the case of any of the offences under Sections 211 and 212.

Chapter-18
Sexual Offences
219. Prohibition of committing rape: (1) No one shall commit rape.
Where a man has sexual intercourse with a woman
without her consent or with a girl child below eighteen years of age
even with her consent, the man shall be considered to commit rape
on such woman or girl child.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
Consent obtained by way of coercion, undue influence,
intimidation, threat, misrepresentation, or kidnapping or
taking of hostage shall not be considered to be consent,
Consent obtained at the time of being of unsoundness of
mind shall not be considered to be consent,
The penetration of penis into anus or mouth, penetration
of penis, to any extent, into anus, mouth or vagina,
insertion of any object other than penis into vagina shall
also be considered to be rape.
A person who commits rape shall be liable to the
sentence of imprisonment as follows, having regard to the
circumstances of such sexual intercourse and the age of woman:
Imprisonment for a term of sixteen to twenty years, if
she is a girl child below ten years of age,
Imprisonment for a term of fourteen to sixteen years, if
she is a girl child who is ten years or above ten years of
age but below fourteen years of age,
Imprisonment for a term of twelve to fourteen years, if
she is a girl child who is fourteen or above fourteen
years of age but below sixteen years of age,
Imprisonment for a term of ten to twelve years, if the
woman is sixteen or above sixteen years of age but
below eighteen years of age,
Imprisonment for a term of seven to ten years, if the
woman is eighteen or above eighteen years of age.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3),
if the husband commits rape on his wife during the existence of
marital relationship between them, he shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years.
Provided that the following situation shall not be considered as
the existence of marital relationship:
A case of partition has been instituted upon
making separation of board and bread,
The wife has lived separate upon taking her
partition share from the husband,
A case of divorce from the husband has been
instituted.
In the case of the situation referred to in sub-section (4),
the court may, if it is necessary to do so upon a petition by the
victim, order the husband to do the following:
(a) To allow the wife to reside in the same house
where she has resided, to provide her with food
and clothes, not to hurt her and to behave her
politely and decently,
To get the wife to have required medical
treatment or provide reasonable amount for her
treatment,
To arrange a separate residence for the husband if
it is not appropriate for them to reside in the same
place together and make necessary arrangement
for the maintenance of the wife while so residing
separately,
To refraining from doing act causing suffering or
annoyance, in any manner, to the wife and do, or
cause to be done, necessary and appropriate act
for the interest and security of the wife.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
a man who commits rape in spite of knowing that he has human
immune deficiency virus (HIV positive) or a sexually transmitted
disease shall be liable to the following additional sentence, in
addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3):
The sentence referred to in Section 105 in the
event of the commission of rape in spite of
knowing that he has human immune deficiency
virus (HIV positive),
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding
thirty thousand rupees in the event of the
commission of rape in spite of knowing that he
has any other sexually transmitted disease.
A man who commits rape on a woman in a gang or on a
woman having pregnancy of more than six months or on a woman
who is infirm or disabled or suffering from physical or mental
illness, or commits rape showing arms shall be liable to an additional
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, in
addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3).
A person who commits rape on a woman within the
prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity or affinity shall be
liable to the sentence referred to in this Chapter, in addition to the
sentence imposable for incest if he is liable to such sentence for
incest.
220. Prohibition of incest: (1) No person shall have sexual intercourse
with another person knowingly that such person is one falling within
the prohibited degree of relationship by consanguinity or affinity for
marriage according to the usage, custom or tradition being practiced
in his or her caste or lineage.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) in the following relationship shall be liable to the
following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for life in the case of
sexual intercourse between the natural mother
and her natural son or between the natural father
and his natural daughter,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of four
years to ten years and a fine of forty thousand
rupees to one hundred thousand rupees in the case
of sexual intercourse between the step-mother
and her step-son, between the step father and his
step daughter, between the full blood elder sister
and brother, between full blood elder brother and
sister, between father-in-law and daughter-in-law
within the same branch, between grand-father and
grand-daughter or great-grand-daughter within
the same branch, between elder brother-in-law
and sister-in-law within the same branch or
between younger brother-in-law and sister-in-law
within the same branch,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of three to
six years and a fine of thirty thousand to sixty
thousand rupees in the case of sexual intercourse
between grand-mother and her grand-son or
great-grand-son within the three generations of
the same branch, between father's elder brother or
uncle and niece within the same branch, between
nephew and great mother (wife of own father's
brother) or aunty within the same branch,
between father-in-law and brother's daughter-inlaw within the same branch, between uterine
maternal uncle and niece or nephew and maternal
aunty, between mother's elder sister or younger
sister and nephew or between mother-in-law
(one's wife side) and son-in-law,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of one
year to three years and a fine of ten thousand to
thirty thousand rupees, having regard to, inter
alia, the branch, relationship and generation, in
the case of sexual intercourse between persons in
other relationship within seven generations of
one’s own clan except that referred to in clause
(a), (b) or (c).
221. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with detainee: (1) No
government employee shall have sexual intercourse with a person
held in prison or detention or facilitate or create circumstances for
the commission by another person of sexual intercourse with such
person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed,
sexual intercourse referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, and if
such sexual intercourse is an offence under this Act or other law also,
the sentence referred to in this Section shall be added to the sentence
under such law.
222. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with person in one's own
protection or security: (1) No person shall have, or aid another
person to have, sexual intercourse with any person in his or her
protection, security or custody, and no office-bearer or employee of
any organization providing treatment or rehabilitation services to
persons of unsound mind or suffering from physical or mental illness
shall have sexual intercourse with any person held in such
organization.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years, and if such sexual intercourse is an
offence under this Act or other law also, the sentence referred to in
this Section shall be added to the sentence under such law.
223. Prohibition of sexual intercourse with person in office or
receiving professional service: (1) No employee serving in a
government office or private office or person providing any
professional service or commercial work shall have, or aid another
person to have, sexual intercourse with a person serving in such
office or a person making contact or being in contact for such service
or work, while performing functions of such office or providing such
service or at the place where such service is provided.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding four years and a fine not exceeding forty thousand
rupees, and if such sexual intercourse is an offence under this Act or
other law also, the sentence referred to in this Section shall be added
to the sentence under such law.
224. Prohibition of sexual harassment: (1) No person shall commit, or
caused to be committed, sexual harassment to another person.
A person shall be considered to commit sexual
harassment if the person holds or touches or attempts to touch any
sensitive organ of, or opens or attempts to open undergarments of, or
obstructs or hinders in any way the wearing or removing of
undergarments of, or takes to any lonely place in an unusual manner,
or gets his or her sexual organ to be touched or held by, or uses
vulgar or similar other words, spoken or written or by gesture or by
way of electronic medium, or shows any pornography to, or teases or
annoys with sexual motive, or behaves in an unusual, undesirable or
indecent manner with, a person who is not his wife or her husband,
without her or his consent, with the motive of having sexual
intercourse with her or him.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
225. Prohibition of child sexual abuse: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, child sexual abuse.
A person shall be considered to commit child sexual
abuse if the person takes to any lonely place in an unusual manner,
or holds or touches any sexual organ of, gets his or her sexual organ
to be touched or held by, or makes any form of unusual sexual
behavior with, a child, with the motive of having sexual intercourse
with the child.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
226. Prohibition of unnatural sexual intercourse: (1) No person shall
have, or cause to be had, unnatural sexual intercourse with another
person without his or her consent.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, consent
given by a child shall not be considered to be consent.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) against a child shall be liable to the sentence under

Section 219.
227. Prohibition of bestiality: (1) No person shall have, or cause to be
had, sexual intercourse with an animal.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (4) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years and a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees, if the person has committed, or caused to be committed,
sexual intercourse with a cow, and to a sentence of imprisonment for
a term not exceeding one year and a fine not exceeding ten thousand
rupees, in the case of sexual intercourse with any other animal.
228. Compensation ordered to be paid: A reasonable compensation
shall be ordered to be paid to the victim of any offence referred to in
this Chapter other than the offences under Sections 220 and 226.
229. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
making a complaint in relation to the case of any offence under

Section 220.
No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one year from
the date of commission of any of the offences under Sections 219,
221, 222, 223, 224 and 225 and sub-section (3) of Section 226, and
after the expiry of three months from the date of knowledge of
commission of any of the other offences under this Chapter.
Provided that where the offence is committed against a person
held in detention, taken into control, kidnapped or taken hostage, no
complaint shall lie after the expiry of three months from the date of
release from such detention, control, kidnapping or hostage-taking.

Chapter-19
Offence Relating to Medical Treatment
230. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment by person who has
not obtained licence: (1) No person, other than a person who has,
upon having acquired the specified educational qualification in
medicines, obtained from the lawful competent authority a licence
for medical treatment, shall provide medical services to, carry out
surgery on any organ of human body of, administer or prescribe any
kind of drug to, or otherwise conduct medical treatment of, any
person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
nothing shall bar a person who has gained knowledge on medical
treatment from a long experience from administering, with due care,
such drug of general nature to a patient suffering from a minor
disease as not causing any specific adverse impact on any human
organ of such patient, or conducting medical treatment by
conducting operation of a minor wound, ecthyma.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
The offender shall be liable to the sentence of
imprisonment for life where any act of providing medical service,
conducting surgery or administering drug in contravention of subsection (1) causes the death of any person, and to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen years where such act
causes grievous hurt.
231. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment maliciously: (1) No
person shall, with the intention of causing death of, or grievous hurt
to, another person, carry out his or her treatment, conduct one type of
medical treatment of him or her instead of another type of treatment
as required, or administer, or prescribe for administration of, any
drug to him or her knowingly or having reason to believe that the
administration or prescription of such drug may cause death of, or
grievous hurt, to him or her or conduct surgery on one organ of
human body of him or her instead of another organ as required or
make such organ dysfunctional or separate such organ from the
human body, or cause the commission of any of such acts.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
The same sentence as imposable for murder, in the case
of causing the death of any person,
The same sentence as imposable for grievous hurt, in
the case of causing grievous heart to any person.
232. Prohibition of conducting medical treatment by recklessness or
negligence: (1) No person authorized under law to conduct medical
treatment shall, in conducting medical treatment of any one, conduct
such treatment, administer any drug or prescribe for the
administration of drug to him or her in a reckless or negligent
manner, without taking adequate care or precaution.
Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) causes
death of or grievous hurt to any one, the offender shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a
fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees if the death or grievous hurt
has been caused from a reckless act and to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees if the death or grievous hurt has
been caused from a negligent act.
233. Prohibition of carrying out experiment on human body without
consent: (1) No person authorized under law to conduct medical
treatment shall, in carrying out an experiment of any method relating
to medical treatment, surgery or drug on the human body, carry out
such experiment, without obtaining consent of the concerned person,
and, in the case of a child or person of unsound mind, without
obtaining consent of his or her father, mother or guardian, and
without giving information thereof to such person, father, mother or
guardian.
Any experiment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
carried out carefully, having regard to, inter alia, the possible effects
of such method, surgery or drug on human body.
No person shall carry out physical examination of or
alter any organ of any one, or cause the commission of such act, with
intention to get any undue economic benefit or to breach the privacy
of a woman or with any other intention.
A person who carries out, or causes to be carried out,
any experiment in contravention of sub-section (1), (2) or (3) shall be
liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
The offender shall be liable to the same sentence as
imposable for murder if the offence referred to in sub-section (1), (2)
or (3) causes the death of any one and to the same sentence as
imposable for grievous hurt if such offence causes grievous hurt to
any one.
234. Prohibition of selling dangerous drug: (1) No person authorized to
sell medicines as per law shall, without prescription of the person
authorized under law to carry out treatment as per law, sell or
distribute any narcotic, toxic or dangerous drug that may cause
serious impact on human body.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
235. Prohibition of adulteration of drugs or sale of adulterated drugs:
(1) No person shall knowingly adulterate any drug in such a manner
as to void or lessen or change the efficacy of such drug or make it
noxious or sell such adulterated drug or any other thing saying that it
is a drug or issue such drug or thing to any one for treatment or
administer, or cause to be administered, such drug to any one.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
The same sentence as imposable for murder, in
the case of death caused from the consumption of
such drug,
The same sentence as imposable for attempted
murder, in the case of danger or likelihood of
danger
to cause death caused from the
consumption of such drug,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one
hundred thousand rupees, in the case of any
grievous hurt or deterioration or deprivation of
power of any organ of the body caused from the
consumption of such drug,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding
fifty thousand rupees in cases other than that
referred to in clause (a), (b), or (c).
236. Prohibition of selling, distributing date-expired drugs or without
taking precaution: (1) No person shall sell any drug required to be
used within a certain time period after the expiry of such date or sell,
distribute any drug without taking any specific precaution if such
precaution must be taken in the sale or distribution of such drug.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees.
237. Prohibition of selling, distributing of drug as a different drug:
(1) No person authorized to sell or distribute any drug under law
shall, while so selling or distributing the drug, sell or distribute a
drug of one type as a drug of another type knowingly or having
reasonable reason to know that such drug is materially a different
type of drug.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
238. Prohibition of giving false report: (1) No person licensed under
law to conduct a pathological test of human blood, urine, sputum etc.
shall give a fake or false report while conducting such test or give a
report stating the facts different than that found from the test.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Where the consumption of any drug prescribed to,
conduction of a surgery on, or treatment of, a person on the basis of
the report referred to in sub-section (1) causes the death of or any
grievous hurt to such person, the person giving such report shall be
deemed to be the offender.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to the same
sentence as imposable for murder, in the case of causing death of,
and to the same sentence as imposable for grievous hurt, in the case
of causing grievous heart to, any person.
239. Compensation to be paid: (1) Where the death of, or grievous hurt
to, or other harm, injury or damage to, any person is caused from the
commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter, reasonable
compensation shall be ordered to be paid by the offender to the
concerned victim and to his or her successor if the victim is dead.
240. Statute of limitation: (1) There shall be no statute of limitation for
filing a complaint if death is caused from any of the acts referred to
in sub-section (4) of Section 230, Section 231, Section 232, subsection (4) of Section 233, Section 235, and sub-section (4) of

Section 238.
No complaint shall lie after one year from the date of
knowledge of commission of the offence under sub-section (1) of

Section 230, and after six months from the date of commission of
any of the other offences under this Chapter.

Chapter-20
Offences Relating to Theft and Robbery
241. Prohibition of theft: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, theft.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who
dishonestly takes any property under the ownership, possession,
control or custody of another person out of such ownership,
possession, control or custody or moves such property without that
other person's consent, with the intention of owning, using or
enjoying it, shall be considered to commit theft.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
The term "consent" means the consent given in writing
or orally or expressed by conduct.
Consent by a child who has not attained eighteen years
of age or a person of unsound mind shall not be
considered to be consent.
242. Punishment for theft: (1) A person who commits, or causes to be
committed, theft in any of the following circumstances shall be liable
to a sentence of imprisonment from a term of two to seven years and
a fine of twenty thousand to seventy thousand rupees:
In the case of theft of any government or public
property or property of any religious place or temple,
In the case of theft of any property, upon administering
liquor or narcotics to, or otherwise making unconscious,
any person,
In the case of theft of any property, upon taking
advantage of earthquake, fire, flood, riot or similar other
situation of crisis or any accident,
In the case of theft of any property of the office or
person whose service one is engaged in,
In the case of theft on a vehicle used for the conveyance
of human persons or goods.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, theft
in any circumstance other than that referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees.
243. Prohibition of burglary (Nakabajani): (1) No person shall commit,
or cause to be committed, burglary.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person shall be
considered to commit burglary if he or she commits theft in a house
by entering into the house by breaking its main gate or by using any
passage, place, method or means other than the main gate, or after
committing theft, he or she quits, or attempts to quit, by breaking its
main gate or by using any passage, place, method or means other
than the main gate.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term of
three to five years and a fine of thirty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees.
244. Prohibition of robbery: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, robbery.
A person shall be deemed to commit robbery if he or
causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt
or restraint or obstruction or fear or intimidation of
instant death or of instant hurt, in order to the
committing of theft or in committing the theft or in
carrying away property obtained by the theft or to the
escaping of arrest after the commission of the theft or
commits theft carrying a deadly weapon,
obtains any money or economic benefit through
criminal extortion by putting any person in fear of
instant death or of instant or of instant restraint,
commits theft by waiting near or on way, road, lonely
place or forest or show of fear or intimidation , using or
threatening to use a deadly weapon,
commits theft in a group of three or more persons.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of seven to
fourteen years and a fine of seventy thousand to one
hundred forty thousand rupees, in the case of the
offence referred to in clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (2),
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to ten
years and a fine of fifty thousand to one hundred
thousand rupees, in the case of the offence referred to in
clause (c) or (d) of sub-section (2).
245. Prohibition of movement carrying tools to be used in commission
of theft: (1) No person shall, with the intention of committing theft
or robbery, move around or enter into or attempt to enter into the
house of any person carrying instruments such as any tool, object,
arms, duplicate key, gloves and ladder that may be used in the
commission of theft or robbery.
A person who so moves, enters into or attempts to enter
into as referred to in sub-section (1) shall, unless otherwise proved,
be considered to have moved, entered into or attempted to enter into,
with the intention of committing theft.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Prohibition of pickpocketing: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, pickpocketing.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who steals
cash or property from the pocket of another person who is walking
on foot, traveling on a vehicle or staying in a public place or from his
or her accompanying purse, bag or means of any other kind, with or
without notice of such other person, shall be considered to commit
pickpocketing.
Provided that where a person pick-pockets a cash amount of
more than ten thousand rupees or property valued at more than ten
thousand rupees, the person shall be considered to commit the
offence referred to in Section 241.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one month or a fine equal to the claimed amount or both
the sentences, in the case of the commission of
pickpocketing for the first time,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two months or a fine equal to the claimed amount or
both the sentences, for each instance from the second
time onwards.
247. Claimed amount to be recovered: The claimed amount, if any,
involved in the offence referred to in this Chapter shall be forfeited
from the offender of such offence and paid to the owner of that
property. If the offender has already spent the property formed of the
claimed amount, property equal to the value of claimed amount shall
be ordered to be paid to the owner.
248. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of the offence in the case of any
of the offences under Sections 245 and 246 and after six months
from the date of knowledge of commission of the offence in the case
of any of the other offences under this Chapter.

Chapter-21
Offences Relating to Cheating, Criminal Breach of Trust and
Extortion
249. Prohibition of cheating: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, cheating.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who
dishonestly causes any kind of loss, damage or injury to another
person whom he or she makes believe in some matter or to any other
person or obtains any benefit for him or her or any one else by
omitting to do as per such belief or by inducement, fraudulent,
dishonest or otherwise deceptive act or preventing such other person
from doing any act shall be considered to commit cheating.
Explanation: Where the victim of cheating has got a deed
executed by the cheater, the deed shall apply to that matter.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees, in the case of cheating the Government
of Nepal or any body under full or majority ownership
or control of the Government of Nepal, except in cases
of corruption,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of cheating by lying one's name,
designation, title, qualification,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees in the cases of any kind of cheating other than
that referred to in clause (a) or (b).
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year, in addition to the sentence set forth in sub-section (3), shall
be imposed in the case of cheating a child, person of unsound mind,
helpless, illiterate or person above seventy-five years of age.
250. Prohibition of causing difference in bid or contract: (1) No
person who has undertaken the responsibility of carrying out any
construction related work or other work or other person who acts on
his or her behalf shall, with dishonest intent, carry out, or cause to be
carried out, the construction or other work, by not using the materials
of the specified standards or quality or by altering the quantity of the
materials to be used or otherwise using materials not conforming to
the specified quality.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (3) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees.
No person who has undertaken the responsibility of
supplying any materials, goods or services or other person who acts
on his or her behalf shall, with dishonest intent, supply materials,
goods or services falling short of the quality or quantity or otherwise
provide materials, goods or services not conforming to the specified
quality.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
251. Prohibition of criminal misappropriation of property: (1) No
person shall make, or cause to be made, criminal misappropriation of
property.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does
any of the following acts shall be considered to commit criminal
misappropriation of property:
To dishonestly possess and use, cause loss and damage
to or misappropriate a property belonging to another
person or rent, sell or dispose it without consent of that
other person.
Provided that if the real owner of an adjoining
land uses the property belonging to another person, by
mistakenly making normal encroachment of the
boundary, he or she shall not be considered to commit
the offence referred to in this clause.
To dishonestly appropriate or otherwise convert any
property not in the possession of any other person to his
or her own use, knowing or having the means of
discovering the owner of such property, or without
returning such property to such owner within a
reasonable time, or without giving notice to the owner to
claim the property or without waiting the owner of such
property until a reasonable time.
Provided that where the finder in good faith
appropriates a property to his or her own use when the
owner of the property is not discovered despite
reasonable efforts or the owner does not claim the
property within a reasonable time after the giving of
notice, he or she shall not be considered to commit the
offence referred to in this Section.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of criminal
misappropriation of property which was in the
possession of a deceased person at the time of that
person's demise and has not since been in the possession
legal
successor,
criminal
misappropriation of property belonging to a child, a
person of unsound mind due to mental or physical
illness, or a person above seventy-five years of age,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
sentences,
criminal
misappropriation of property in cases other than that set
forth in clause (a).
If any property subjected to criminal misappropriation
under this Section is in a returnable condition, the person who so
misappropriates shall return the property to the concerned owner or
to his or her immediate successor if the owner is dead.
252. Prohibition of criminal breach of trust: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal breach of trust.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does
any of the following acts shall be considered to commit, or cause the
commission of, criminal breach of trust:
To dishonestly appropriate or otherwise convert to his
or her own use other's property which is under his or her
custody or protection or to dishonestly appropriate such
property in his or her own use, or allow such property to
be used by, or dispose, or cause the disposal, of such
property to, another person, in violation of any contract,
deed of conditions or law concerning the use of such
property,
To cause any loss, damage or injury by a person, who is
entrusted with responsibility or has lawful duty of doing
any work or transaction of another person or who acts as
an agent of another in relation to any work or
transaction, to that other person by doing any act in
violation of his or her duty with the intention of causing
benefit to himself or herself or any one else.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five years and a fine not exceeding fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of the commission of criminal breach
of trust by a person in the capacity of manager, director,
employee or agent of any organization or by a person
entrusted with the responsibility of carrying a property
from one place to another or keeping it safely in a
warehouse or any other place or with a legal duty to do
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences, in the case of the
commission of criminal breach of trust by any person
other than that set forth in clause (a).
253. Prohibition of extortion: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, extortion.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who puts
any person in fear or terror of any injury to that person or to any
other person and dishonestly takes any benefit from that person for
himself or herself or any other person or induces that person to do, or
prevents that person from doing, any act with the intention of taking
such benefit shall be considered to commit extortion.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees, in the case of putting a person in fear or terror of
death, grievous hurt or serious injury, with the intention
of committing extortion,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees, in the case of commission of extortion by
showing fear or terror with the intention of causing any
damage to any other person's business or making a false
accusation in respect of such person's character,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or
both the sentences, in the case of the commission of
extortion in cases other than that set forth in clause (a)
or (b).
Compensation: Where any injury or damage is caused to any
person from the commission of the offence referred to in this
Chapter, the claimed amount, if set out, and a reasonable
compensation, if the claimed amount is not set out, shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender to the victim.
Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

Chapter-22
Offences Relating to Currency
256. Prohibition of counterfeiting currency: (1) No person shall
counterfeit, or attempt to counterfeit, any currency.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term of five to ten years and a fine of fifty
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees, having regard to the
quantity and value of the currency counterfeited.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) “currency” means any kind of currency note, postal
order, postal note, money order, cheque, draft, traveler's
cheque, letter of credit, letter of exchange, bond and
credit card, and this term also includes such other
similar kind of monetary instrument as specified by the
Bank, as required, by publishing and circulating a
public notice.
(b) "counterfeit currency" means a currency which is so
forged in an unauthorized manner or counterfeit as
resembling or having reason to believe it to be a
currency issued by the Government of Nepal or Nepal
Rastra Bank or foreign government or competent
foreign body.
257. Prohibition of using counterfeit currency: (1) No person shall,
with the intention of using as genuine, purchase, sell, export, import,
transact, or use as genuine, any counterfeit currency or attempt to do
such act or possess such currency.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding seventy thousand
rupees.
258. Prohibition of making, possessing or repairing instruments for
counterfeiting currency: (1) No person shall make, repair,
purchase, sell, give, take, export, import or possess any instrument or
other material knowing that or having a reasonable reason to believe
that it is intended to be used in or for forging or counterfeiting
currency.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
259. Prohibition of making currency contrary to standards: (1) No
authority or person entrusted by the law in force to make currency
shall knowingly make currency in contravention of the standards
specified by law, make currency in violation of the terms and
restrictions applicable to the making of currency, make currency in
excess of the quantity specified or do any act with the intention of
making currency with such deviation or cause benefit to himself or
herself or any other person from such act or facilitate such act.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years and a fine not
exceeding seventy thousand rupees.
260. Prohibition of taking outside currency making instruments: (1)
No person shall, except with the order of the competent authority
under law, take any currency making machinery, equipment or other
instrument out of the place where currency is made.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
261. Prohibition of diminishing weight or altering form of currency:
(1) No person shall diminish the weight of metallic currency or alter
the composition of metallic element or export, import or possess
currency, by causing the currency of one type to appear like the
currency of another type, with the intention of using it as genuine or
knowing that it may be used as genuine.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
262. Prohibition of bringing prohibited currency into use: (1) No
person shall bring into use, exchange or possess a currency in use but
circulation of which has been banned by order of the competent
authority under law, in violation of such order.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences, and the
currency so brought into use, exchanged or possessed shall also be
forfeited.
263. Prohibition of burning, tearing, melting bank notes or coins or
writing on bank notes: (1) No person shall, except with the order of
the competent authority, burn a coin or bank note tendered as
currency or so melt or tear it that it is incapable of being used.
No person shall write on or cross off bank notes.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable to a
sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months and
a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees.
264. Prohibition of misusing torn bank notes: (1)
No person who is
entrusted by order of the competent authority under law with a duty
of burning or disposing off the torn notes held to be burnt or
disposed of because such bank notes tendered as currency are worn
and torn or letters, signs or sizes are unrecognizable or such notes
cannot be brought into use for any other reason shall bring into use
such bank notes or refrain from burning or disposing of such notes or
give them to another person dishonestly intending to obtain any kind
of benefit therefrom.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
265. Forfeiture: The currency, machine, equipment or tools used in, and
materials related to, the commission of any offence under this
Chapter shall be forfeited
266. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

Chapter-23
Offences Relating to Stamps
267. Prohibition of counterfeiting stamps or using counterfeit stamps:
(1) No person shall, with the intention of using as genuine,
counterfeit, attempt to counterfeit a stamp, purchase, sell, exchange,
export or import a counterfeit stamp, or use or attempt to use as
genuine, or possess, such stamp.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
"stamp" means a postal stamp or other revenue stamp
to be affixed to a document, and this term also includes
the sign of a stamp affixed to or printed on an envelope,
post letter or any other object or a sticker to be used for
the purpose of stamp.
"counterfeit stamp" means a forged stamp made in an
unauthorized manner so that it resembles a stamp
referred to in clause (a), and this term also includes a
stamp that has once been used.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
268. Prohibition of purchasing, selling, repairing instruments for
counterfeiting stamps: (1) No person shall make, repair, purchase,
sell, exchange, possess any machinery or other instrument knowing
or having reasonable ground to believe that it is intended to be used
for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees.
269. Prohibition of re-using stamp used before: (1) No person,
knowing that any stamp is a stamp already used before, shall re-use
as genuine such stamp or erase, efface or remove any seal or mark
put or impressed upon any stamp with the intention of using it as
genuine or attempt to do so.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
270. Prohibition of removing from public document stamp used for
it: (1) No person shall remove, or attempt to remove, from a public
document a stamp which has been used for it.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
271. Forfeiture: Any stamp, tool, instrument or other material related to
the commission of any offence referred to in this Chapter shall be
forfeited.
272. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of one
year from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence under
this Chapter.

Chapter-24
Offences Relating to Weights and Measures
273. Prohibition of making or using false instrument for weighing
and measuring: (1) No person shall make, or cause to be made, any
instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality standards
in a manner that it does not conform to the specified standards or
knowingly use as genuine any instrument so made for weighing,
measuring or determining quality standards or possess or sell such
instrument which is intended to be so used or make false seal or
mark to be affixed to such instrument or tamper the seal or mark
affixed to the instrument for weighing, measuring or determining
quality standards or manipulate, with the help of any other
instrument, the weighing, measuring or quality determining ability of
such instrument or affix a false seal or mark to such instrument or,
by way of any other means, make any weight or measure different
from the prevalent one.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality
standards" means an instrument in use under the law to measure or
determine the unit, quality or quantity of any good or service or
purity or standards of such good or service or unit of any thing.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
Any instrument made or brought into use under subsection (1) and tool for making or repairing such instrument shall
also be forfeited.
274. Prohibition of fraudulent use of instrument for weighing,
measuring or determining quality standards: (1) In using the
instrument for weighing, measuring or determining quality standards
in the course of any business, transaction or trade, no person shall
fraudulently use such instrument in a manner to be different from the
weight, measure or standard specified for use or, with the help of any
other instrument or means, cause adverse effect to the weighing,
measuring or quality determination by such instrument as per the
prevailing weights and measures.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
275. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie in relation to any
offence under this Chapter after the expiry of three months from the
date of knowledge of commission of such offence.

Chapter-25
Offences Relating to Documents
276. Prohibition of forgery: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, forgery.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who makes
a false document or false electronic record or a part or portion of a
document or electronic record, with intent to cause any harm, injury
or damage to the public or to any person or to render any benefit to
the person himself or herself or to any person shall be considered to
commit forgery.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
"document" means signature, thumb impression,
seal affixed on any document and the figure,
word, date or any other content set forth in any
document.
"making a false document" means any of the
following acts:
to dishonestly prepare a document or part
of a document, make or transmit an
electronic record, archive digitals in an
electronic record, with the intention of
causing it to be believed that such
document was made, written, signed or
sealed by the person or authority who has
not actually made, written, signed or sealed
the document,
to, without lawful authority or dishonestly,
add or delete any content to or from, strike
out, change or otherwise alter or make
unclear any content of a document or
electronic record,
to cause any person to make, sign, seal, or
alter any content of, a document knowing
that such person by reason of being of
unsound mind due to mental illness or
intoxication of liquors or narcotics or by
reason of deception practiced on him or her
cannot know the meaning of any contents
set down in the document,
to prepare or use any envelope, paper
signed and delivered or any seal delivered
for a work or purpose other than that for
which such envelope, paper or seal was
signed, and delivered.
A person who commits the offence referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding ten years and a fine not exceeding one
hundred thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of
a document authenticated by the President,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding eight years and a fine not exceeding
eighty thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of a
judgment or order of a court,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding seven years and a fine not exceeding
seventy thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of
a government or public document other than that
referred to in clauses (a) and (b),
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not
exceeding five years and a fine not exceeding
fifty thousand rupees, in the case of forgery of a
document other than that referred to in clauses
(a), (b) and (c).
A person who has already disposed of property which
he or she has obtained by committing forgery shall be liable to an
additional fine equal to the claimed amount, in addition to the
sentence referred in sub-section (3).
Where a person obtains any property by committing
forgery, the person shall return such property to the concerned
owner; and in the event that such property has already been disposed
of, the claimed amount of such property shall be caused to be
recovered to the owner from any other property of the offender.
277. Prohibition of possessing or using as genuine a forged document:
(1) No person shall, knowingly or having a reasonable reason to
believe that a document is a forged one, possess such document, with
intent to dishonestly use such document as genuine.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years and a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees.
A person who uses as genuine any document which he
or she knows or has a reasonable reason to believe to be a forged
document shall be liable to the sentence in the same manner as if he
or she had forged such document.
278. Prohibition of making instrument for making forged document:
(1) No person shall make, repair, purchase, exchange or possess any
seal or other instrument for making a forged document, with the
intention of using it in establishing or making a forged document, or
knowingly or having a reasonable reason to believe that it may be
used in such act.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding four years and a fine not
exceeding forty thousand rupees.
279. Prohibition of committing fraud: (1) No person shall commit, or
cause to be committed, fraud.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who, with
intent to disentitle any one, expire the statute of limitation or
appointed date for presence of, or cause, in any manner, loss,
damage, injury or benefit to, any one, knowingly does an act stating
that any thing has happened or been done which has not happened or
been done in fact or makes or signs a document containing a false
date, figure or content or causes another person to sign such
document or showing that he or she has entitlement in any thing in
which he or she has no such entitlement in fact, which does not
constitute the offence of forgery, shall be considered to commit the
offence of fraud.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
A person who has already disposed of property which
he or she has obtained by committing fraud shall be liable to an
additional fine equal to the claimed amount, in addition to the
sentence referred in sub-section (3).
Where a person obtains any property by committing
fraud, the person shall return such property to the concerned owner;
and in the event that such property has already been disposed of, the
claimed amount of such property shall be caused to be recovered to
the owner from any other property of the offender.
280. Prohibition of using as genuine a fraudulent document: (1) No
person shall, knowingly or having a reason to believe that a
document is a fraudulent one, use such document as genuine.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the sentence in
the same manner as if he or she had committed fraud.
281. Liable to punishment as accomplice: A person who becomes a
witness to, or writes, a document knowing that the document is a
forged one shall be considered as an accomplice of the offence of
forgery.
An accomplice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
liable to half the sentence set forth in sub-section (3) of Section 273.
282. Compensation ordered to be paid: Where any loss or damage is
caused to any person from the commission of any offence referred to
in this Chapter, a reasonable compensation shall be ordered to be
paid by the offender to such person who has suffered such loss or
damage.
283. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie, in relation to the
offence of forgery of a public document after the expiry of two years
from the date of knowledge of commission of such offence, and in
relation to any of the other offences under this Chapter, after the
expiry of six months from the date of knowledge of commission of
such offence.

Chapter-26
Offences Relating to Criminal Trespass and Criminal Mischief
284. Prohibition of committing criminal trespass: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal trespass into the property
of another person.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who, with
intent to do the following act, enters, in an unauthorized manner, and
whether doing manhandling or not, into a property owned or
possessed by another person without obtaining such other person’s
permission or enters into such property with such permission but
remains in, or continues to occupy or use, that property with intent
thereby to do any of such acts shall be considered to commit criminal
trespass:
Committing any offence, or
Intimidating, insulting or annoying the owner or
possessor of the property.
A person commits the offence referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be liable to the following sentence:
In the case of a person who commits criminal trespass
for the purpose referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(2), a sentence equal to the sentence imposable for
attempt to such offence,
In the case of criminal trespass into a government office
or human dwelling house for the purpose referred to in
clause
sub-section
sentence
imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or a
fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or both the
sentences.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section,-
A place of temporary residence shall also be
considered to be a house.
Entry into, or use of, a way, passage, water
collection center, irrigation canal, graveyard,
temple that have been in public use for time
immemorial shall not be considered to be
criminal trespass.
285. Prohibition of committing criminal mischief: (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, criminal mischief.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does
any of the following acts shall be considered to commit criminal
mischief:
Destroying, or doing such act as to diminish the value,
importance or utility of, any government, public or
private property, with the intention of causing any harm,
loss or damage to the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level, any body corporate under
full or majority ownership or control of the Government
of Nepal, State Government or Local Level or public or
any person, or knowing or having a reasonable reason to
believe that such damage is likely to be caused, or
causing such damage by a negligent or reckless act,
Causing loss, damage or wrongful injury to, or doing
any act that causes injury to, or knowingly causing any
kind of obstruction, loss, damage or wrongful injury to
the utility of, any public or private sewerage, water
canal, drinking water pond, road, bridge or any means
of communications or transportation and the like,
Destroying, removing, erasing or tampering any mark or
sign fixed for public convenience, except for any act
done in pursuance of an order of the competent
authority, by spreading rumors or using any means of
deception,
Concealing, or dishonestly causing delay in the delivery
of, any correspondence, notice, parcel or other object of
another person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to the following
sentence:
The sentence of imprisonment for life and a fine equal
to the claimed amount, in the case of setting fire to, or
using explosives, in any national park or reserve or
protected zone, with the objective of destroying the
existence of species of any wildlife or flora or fauna
protected by the Government of Nepal or protected
pursuant to law, any historical or archeological
monument or statue included in the world heritage list,
any site or museum in which objects of historical or
archeological importance are kept, or any achieve where
historical documents are kept, any military or paramilitary house or place in which arms and ammunition
of the army or police are stored, security press, mint,
factory, Nepal Rastra Bank's warehouse for bank note
printing or storing,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of five to twelve
years and a fine equal to the claimed amount, in the case
of criminal mischief committed by setting fire to, or
using explosives in, any historical, archeological or
religious monument or statue other than that referred to
in clause (a), any building containing documents of
public
governmental
importance,
court
containing money (Tahabil), any constitutional body,
any office of the Government of Nepal, State
Government or Local Level or body under full or
majority ownership or control of the Government of
Nepal, State Government, or Local Level, or any office
of foreign diplomatic mission or international or intergovernmental organization,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
four years and a fine not exceeding forty thousand
rupees, in the case of criminal mischief committed by
doing any act other than that referred to in clause (a) or
(b), thereby causing injury to any public property,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term of two to five
years and a fine of twenty thousand to fifty thousand
rupees, in the case of criminal mischief committed by
setting fire to or using explosives in any house, office or
property of any person,
A sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three years and a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees in the case of criminal mischief committed by
doing any act other than that referred to in clause (a),
(b), (c) or (d), thereby causing any loss, damage to any
person.
Where any loss, damage is caused to any person by
reason of the commission of the offence referred to in this Section, a
compensation equal to the claimed amount of such loss or damage so
caused shall be ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim of the
offence.
286. Prohibition of committing larceny (looting): (1) No person shall
commit, or cause to be committed, larceny.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who does
any act, other than an act that constitutes theft or cheating, by which
he or she otherwise snatches, whether forcibly or not, takes, whether
by manhandling or fighting or giving threat thereof, or causes loss,
damage to any property which he or she has no right in or which is
under ownership, custody or control of another person, with the
intention of snatching, taking, or causing loss, damage to, such
property shall be considered to commit larceny.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding twenty-five
percent of the claimed amount subjected to larceny or both the
sentences, and the claimed amount subjected to larceny shall be
ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim.
287. Prohibition of acquiring property obtained by committing
offence: (1) No person shall acquire, hold, purchase or sell any
property knowing or having a reasonable reason to believe that such
property has been obtained by committing an offence.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or a fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
The property acquired, held, purchased or sold as set
forth in sub-section (1) shall be returned to the owner of such
property.
288. Statute of limitation: A complaint in relation to an offence under

Section 284 or 285 shall not be entertained after the expiry of six
months from the date of commission of such offence, in relation to
the offence under Section 286, after the expiry of three months from
the date of commission of such offence, and in relation to any of
other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of three months
from the date of having knowledge of the commission of such
offence.

Chapter-27
Offences Relating to Animals and Birds
289. Prohibition of killing or beating cows or oxen: (1) No person shall
do, or cause to be done, any act with the intention of killing, or
causing hurt to, any cow or ox.
Where any act referred to in sub-section (1) causes the
death of any cow or ox, the offender of such offence shall be liable to
a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years.
A person shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment
for a term not exceeding six months, if he or she causes grievous hurt
to a cow or ox, and to a sentence of a fine not exceeding fifty
thousand rupees if other hurt is caused.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a person does any act necessary to protect from any injury likely to
be caused by any cow or ox to the body or life of the person or
another person and such act causes the death of, or any harm to, such
cow or ox, the person shall not be considered to commit any offence
under this Section.
290. Prohibition of cruel treatment to animals and birds: (1) No
person shall subject any animal or bird to torture by beating or
hitting it, or by causing it to carry a load beyond its capacity or by
causing it to walk or run beyond its ability or by engaging it in work
if it is unable to work because of illness, wound or Khatira, or any
other cause, or by feeding it harmful substance or in any other
manner whatsoever or leave publicly any animal or bird which he or
she has grown up because of its being ill or aged or otherwise treat it
cruelly or mercilessly.
Provided that nothing shall bar the using of minimum force in
order to make any animal or bird do any work or carry a load
according to its physical capacity or make it run, with the objective
to teach or train it to do any wok or make it efficient on its work.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
291. Prohibition of killing animals or birds in public places: (1) Except
as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall kill any animal or
bird in any public place other than a religious place where there is a
tradition to offer sacrifice of an animal or bird.
Provided that nothing shall bar the killing of any animal or
bird in a fair, feast, exhibition or event or place where there is a
tradition of slaughtering animals or birds being practiced from time
immemorial.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“public place” means a way, road, bridge, meadow or place for
movement of human beings.
In making sacrifice of an animal or bird under subsection (1), no sacrifice of such animal or bird shall be executed in
any public place or religious place other than a religious place where
the sacrifice of animals or birds has been in practice from time
immemorial.
In making sacrifice of an animal or bird under subsection (1), any alternative measure, if any available, to such
sacrificing shall be adopted.
Where it is necessary to make sacrifice of an animal or
bird being it not possible to adopt the measure under sub-section (3),
such sacrifice shall be made at such place and in accordance with
such method as determined by the manager of the concerned
religious place.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in this Section shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or a fine not
exceeding five thousand rupees or both the sentences.
292. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie in relation to any of the
offences under Section 290, after the expiry of three months from the
date of commission of such offence, and in relation to any of the
other offences under this Chapter, after the expiry of three months
from the date of knowledge of commission of such act.

Part-3
Offences against Individual Privacy and Prestige

Chapter-1
Offences against Privacy
293. Prohibition of listening to or recording other's conversation: (1)
No person shall, by using a mechanical device, listen to, or record,
any conversation held between two or more persons, without
permission of the competent authority or consent of such persons
holding conversation.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that this Section shall not apply to any speech or
statement made publicly.
294. Prohibition of divulging confidential matter: (1) No person shall
divulge another person's confidential matter, which he or she comes
to know from such person in the course of his or her professional
work, except where such divulgence is compelled by law or
permitted by such person.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
or both the sentences.
295. Prohibition of taking or disfiguring photograph of any person
without his or her consent: (1) No person shall, without consent of
another person, take a photograph of that other person or make
another photograph by mixing other's photograph with the
photograph of that other person.
Provided that a person who, while taking a photograph of any
public place, happens to take also a photograph of any person
remaining in such place shall not be considered to commit the
offence under this Section.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
No person shall make a disfigured photograph by
mixing some part of one's photograph with another part of other's
photograph or in any other manner or publish such disfigured
photograph.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (3) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
296. Prohibition of giving or selling one’s photograph to another
without consent: (1) No person shall give or sell one's photograph
without his or her consent to another person, or publish, publicize,
purchase or sell such photograph, with the intention of annoying,
disturbing or troubling him or her or taking any undue benefit from
him or her or taking benefit by making commercial use of such
photograph.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or a fine not
exceeding thirty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
297. Prohibition of opening letters or tapping telephone conversation:
(1) No person shall open a person's letter or tap or record a person’s
telephone conversation by using any mechanical device, without
permission of the competent authority or the concerned person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, an
offence under sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
298. Prohibition of breaching privacy through electronic means: (1)
No person shall obtain, in an unauthorized manner, a notice,
information and correspondence lying in or to be transmitted from
any electronic means or breach privacy thereof, or transfer, or cause
to be transferred, the same to another person in an unauthorized
manner.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not
exceeding twenty thousand rupees or both the sentences.
299. Prohibition of deceitfully making telephone calls or transmitting
messages: (1) No person shall deceitfully make, or cause to be made,
any telephone call or transmit any message, whether giving his or her
identity or not, with the intention of avoiding, deceiving, annoying or
troubling another person.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
300. Prohibition of writing letters with dishonest intention of causing
annoyance: (1) No person shall, with the dishonest intention of
causing fear, terror or pain to, or annoying, insulting or defaming
another person, threat, annoy, tease that other person by writing or
causing to be written any letter, pamphlet or document of any other
type or through electronic means or otherwise behave such person
improperly.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
301. Prohibition search other's body: (1) No person, except the
competent authority, or with the order of the competent authority, or
a person deputed for security purpose, with the permission of the
competent authority, shall search, or cause to be searched, another
person's body, vehicle or personal belongings without consent of that
other person.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
302. Prohibition of unauthorized entry into other's residence: (1) No
person, except the competent authority or with the order of such
authority under law, shall authoritatively enter into another person's
house, breach the privacy of the house owner or his or her family or
search, or cause to be searched, such house, without the consent of
the concerned house owner.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"house" means a house, residence, housing, room where a person is
dwelling, and this term also includes a hotel room, camp and tent
where such person is staying to spend a night.
A person who commits the offence referred to in subsection (1) shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three years or a fine not exceeding thirty thousand
rupees or both the sentences.
303. Compensation to be paid: Where a person derives any benefit or
causes any kind of damage, loss, annoyance or injury to another
person by committing the offence referred to in this Chapter, a
compensation for such damage, loss, annoyance or injury shall also
be ordered to be paid by the offender to the victim.
304. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of commission of any offence under this
Chapter.

Chapter-2
Offence Relating to Defamation
305. Prohibition of committing slander: (1) No person shall slander
another person.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who uses
degrading words, spoken or said, with the intention of lowering the
reputation of another person shall be deemed to commit slander.
A person who commits, or causes to be committed, the
offence referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a sentence of
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or a fine not
exceeding ten thousand rupees or both the sentences.
306. Prohibition of committing libel: (1) No person shall defame
another person.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person who
commits any of the following acts shall be deemed to commit
defamation:
(a) By words in writing, by conduct or by signs or by
visible representation or by publicity or by other means,
damaging the character of another person by making
imputation that, directly or indirectly, in the estimation
of others, lowers the personal or moral character,
conduct or reputation of that other person, or making
imputation that causes it to be believed that the body of
that other person is in a state generally considered as
disgraceful or disseminating or publishing such
imputation, with the intention of harming, or knowing,
or having a reasonable reason to believe that, such
imputation will harm, the reputation of that other
person, or knowingly selling or distribution any thing
which is used as a means of libeling any one,
Making any imputation against a deceased person if the
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if
living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his
or her family or other near relatives,
Making or expressing an imputation in the form of an
alternative or ironically.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in subsection (2), none of the following acts shall be considered to be libel:
Publishing or broadcasting any thing which is true
concerning any person, along with the evidence and
basis, for public good,
Publishing in good faith and decently any thing
respecting the conduct of any public servant in the
discharge of his or her public functions or respecting his
or her character only so far as his or her character
appears in that conduct,
Expressing in good faith any opinion respecting the
conduct of public office or position of any person and
respecting his or her character only so far as his or her
character appears in that conduct,
Expressing in good faith and decently any opinion
respecting the merits of any performance which its
author has submitted to the public for opinion or
respecting the character of the author only so far as his
or her character appears in such performance,
Passing in good faith any censure on the conduct of a
person who has over another person any authority,
either conferred by law or arising out of a contract made
with that other person in matters to which such authority
relates.
Investigating into any offence in accordance with law or
preferring accusation against him or her on that basis in
accordance with law,
Cautioning a person against other person, for his or her
benefit or for the benefit of a person having his or her
interest or for the benefit of the public.
307. Punishment for libel: (1) A person who commits, or causes to be
committed, libel shall be liable to a sentence of imprisonment for a
term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding twenty
thousand rupees or both the sentences.
Provided that if libel is committed or, caused to be committed,
by means of electronic or other means of mass communication, there
shall be imposed an additional sentence of imprisonment for a term
not exceeding one year or a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees
in addition to such punishment.
If a person is convicted of libeling another person or
causing such libel, a reasonable compensation to be set having regard
to, inter alia, the gravity of the offence, effect caused to the
reputation of such person and the commission of libel by means of
electronic or other means of mass communication, shall be ordered
to be paid by the offender to the libeled person, and litigation costs
shall also be ordered to be paid by the offender to the libeled person.
If a person is convicted of libeling a deceased under this
Chapter, such compensation and litigation costs shall be ordered to
be paid by the offender to the near successor to the deceased whose
feeling was hurt.
308. Statute of limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of three
months from the date of knowledge of commission of any offence
under this Chapter.

===== SOURCE: National-Sentencing-Code(2074).pdf =====

The Criminal Offences (Sentencing and
Execution) Act, 2017 (2074)
Date of Authentication:
16 October 2017 (2074.6.30)
Act Number 38 of the year 2017 (2074)
An Act Made to Provide for Determination and Execution of
Sentences for Criminal Offences
Preamble: Whereas it is expedient to make legal provisions for the
determination of appropriate sentences for offenders who commit
criminal offences and the execution of such sentences, in order to
maintain the interest and decency of the general public by creating a just,
peaceful and safe society;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament under clause (1) of

Article 296 of the Constitution of Nepal has made this Act.
Chapter – 1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act is cited as the
"Criminal Offenses (Sentencing and Execution) Act, 2017
(2074)".
Clauses (d), (e), (f) and (g) of Section 17, Sections
22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31 and 49 of this Act shall come into
force on a date appointed by the Government of Nepal by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette, and the other Sections shall
come into force on the first date of the month of Bhadra 2075
(……….).
Definitions: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in
this Act,-
"Penal Code" means the National Penal (Code) Act,
2017;
"offender" means a person who is convicted by a
court of any offense;
"law" means a law in force for the time being;
"prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as
prescribed in the rules framed under this Act;
"probation officer" means a probation officer
appointed or designated pursuant to Section 49;
"Probation and Parole Board" means the probation
and parole board under Section 38;
"Criminal Procedure Code" means the National
Criminal Procedure (Code) Act, 2017;
"Committee" means the sentence recommendation
committee under Section 46.
Application of the Act: (1) This Act shall apply to the
determination by a court of a sentence for any offence and
execution thereof.
This Act shall not apply to the following:
imposing a sentence for an offence relating to
the contempt of court,
imposing a sentence for a breach of the
privilege, proceeding of which has been
instituted by the Legislature-Parliament,
in cases where any law provides for the nonapplicability of this Act.
Chapter – 2
General Principles of Sentencing
Application of provisions of the Penal Code and Criminal
Procedure Code: (1) This Act shall be implemented subject to the
Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code.
Wherever used in this Act, the several terms defined
in the Penal Code and Criminal Procedure Code shall have the
respective meanings therein set forth.
The principles set forth in the Penal Code shall also
be applicable to the implementation of this Act.
Lesser sentence to be imposed: If any offence is punishable by
law with a sentence that is lesser at the time of sentencing than the
sentence at the time of commission of the offence, sentence shall
be so determined that it is the lesser.
Sentence under other law to be determined: If any law provides
for a sentence of imprisonment for a fixed term or a sentence of a
fine or penalty of fixed amount for any offence, the offender of
such offence shall be subjected to such imprisonment, fine or
penalty accordingly.
Sentence to be imposed under this Act: Except for the cases set
forth in Section 6, sentence for any offence shall be determined
pursuant to this Act.
Sentence to be determined after conviction: (1) A court shall
determine a sentence to any person for any offense only after such
person is convicted of such offence by the court in accordance
with law.
Sentence shall be determined pursuant to sub-section
(1) not later than thirty days of the conviction.
Separate hearing to be conducted: (1) A sentence shall be
determined for an offender pursuant to Section 8 by conducting a
separate hearing.
Provided that no separate hearing shall be required for
determining sentence for an offender of an offense punishable by
sentence of imprisonment for up to three years or fine of up to
thirty thousand rupees.
Except in cases where a judge who declared
conviction has died, retired or become unable to discharge duties
because of a severe disease, the same judge himself or herself
shall, in any other circumstance whatsoever, determine the
sentence by conducting a hearing under sub-section (1).
Sentence to be determined by conducting hearing in open
bench: (1) Sentence shall be determined in open bench for an
offender of a case other than a case that is required by law to be
heard in camera.
Sentence shall be determined under sub-section (1)
in presence of the offender or his or her legal practitioner as well.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), nothing shall bar the determination of a sentence under this
Act even if the offender cannot be produced before the court for
reason of security or public interest or the offender refuses to
appear before the court or the offender is absconding or legal
practitioner of the offender is not present.
An offender who cannot be produced before the court
under sub-section (3) may be produced through videoconferencing; and where an offender is so produced, the offender
shall be deemed to have appeared before the court for the purpose
of this Section.
More than one sentence not to be executed: (1) In determining a
sentence for an offender who has committed more than one
offense in a single incident, each offence shall be deemed to have
been committed separately and separate sentence shall be
determined for the same.
Provided that where sentence for more than one offence
committed at the same time is to be executed, the sentence for
the offense carrying the maximum sentence shall be executed.
If two or more acts constitute an offence and any one
of such acts is itself a separate offense, only the sentence for the
offence carrying the maximum punishment shall be imposed.
If an act constitutes separate offenses under the
different Acts, the sentence provided by the Act which is the
highest of the sentences under such Acts shall be executed.
Provided that in determining the sentence, separate sentence
shall be determined for each offense.
Explanation:
purposes
Section,
imprisonment and fine shall be considered separate sentences and
executed separately.
Order to be given to prepare pre-sentence report: (1) If, prior
to determining the sentence for an offense punishable by
imprisonment for more than three years or fine of more than thirty
thousand rupees, the court thinks so necessary, it may order a
probation officer or parole officer to prepare a pre-sentence report
in respect of the offender.
(2) Upon receipt of the order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
probation officer or parole officer shall prepare a report in respect
of the offender, setting out the following matters:
personal, social and cultural background of the
offender,
circumstances surrounding the commission of
the offence,
the offender's conduct before the commission
of the offence,
the offender's age,
such other matters as considered necessary by
the probation officer or parole officer.
(3) After the preparation of the report under sub-section (2),
the probation officer or parole officer shall submit such report to
the court.
Upon receipt of the report under sub-section (3), the
court shall provide the report to the concerned government
attorney, offender and his or her legal practitioner and, if the
offender is a child, to his or her guardian.
Upon receipt of the report under sub-section (4), such
government attorney, offender, guardian or legal practitioner may
submit his or her opinion on that report to the Court.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in cases where the probation officer or parole officer is
not designated or appointed, the court shall order the legal
practitioners of the plaintiff and the defendant to prepare the report
under sub-section (1).
Upon receipt of the order under sub-section (6), such
legal practitioner shall prepare and submit such report to the
Court.
13. Purposes of sentencing to be taken into account: The court shall
determine the sentence by taking into account all or any of the
following purposes:
to deter the offender or other persons from
committing the offence,
to protect the society or community,
to deliver justice, along with compensation, to the
victim,
to assist in the offender's rehabilitation in the society,
or to reform the offender,
to isolate the offender from the society,
to make the offender regret his or her offending and
promote
offender
sense
acknowledgement that harm has been done to the
victim or the community,
to denounce the conduct prohibited by law.
Matters to be taken into account in determining sentence: The
court shall determine a sentence by taking into account the
following matters:
sentence should not be disproportionate to the gravity
of the offence and the degree of culpability of the
offender,
sentence should not be more severe than is necessary
to achieve the purposes of sentencing,
sentence should not be incompatible with or unequal
to the sentence previously imposed on another
offender of the offence committed in similar
circumstances,
in determining a sentence for two offences or
imposing a sentence for another offence on an
offender who is serving a sentence for one offence,
the overall sentence should not be unjust and
disproportionate,
sentence of imprisonment should not be imposed
where other sentence seems to be adequate in
proportion to the offense.
Grounds for determining sentence: (1) A sentence shall be
determined pursuant to this Act on the following grounds:
the gravity of the offence and the degree of
culpability of the offender,
the circumstances surrounding the commission
of offense,
the gravity of the offence aggravating or
mitigating factors,
the offender's conduct and previous activities,
purposes of the sentencing set forth in Section
In determining a sentence pursuant to sub-section (1),
the sentence shall be determined as follows:
the sentence of imprisonment for an offender
who commits a heinous or grave offence,
in sentencing a child, his or her reform and
rehabilitation,
for a recidivist, a sentence that is double the
sentence imposable for the last offense
committed,
the sentence of imprisonment for an offender
who is dangerous to the society or the
community,
for an offender who, being a holder of a
position or authority in any government office
or public or body corporate, commits an
offence by abusing such position or authority,
the sentence that is one and half of the sentence
imposable on such offence.
Matters to be taken into account in sentencing a child: (1) In
imposing a sentence on a child, the following matters shall also be
taken into account:
his or her best interests,
the gravity of the offence and the degree of
culpability,
his or her personal circumstances,
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause,
"personal circumstances" includes the age,
education, family and social condition of the
child, type of the offense, harm caused by the
offense and the objective of the commission of
the offence.
compensation offered to the victim,
remorse shown for the offence,
desire for living a good and useful life.
In imposing a sentence on a child below sixteen years
of age, the sentence of imprisonment shall not be imposed except
in cases where the child has committed a heinous or grave
offence or is a recidivist.
17. Matters to be set out in determining sentence: (1) In
determining a sentence pursuant to this Act, the following matters
shall be set out in the decision or order:
the reason for awarding the sentence,
in the case of determination of the sentence of fine,
the amount of fine to be paid by the offender, the date
for payment of the fine, whether the fine is payable
by installments, the sentence of imprisonment
imposable for failure to pay the fine,
in the case of determination of the sentence of
imprisonment, the term of imprisonment, the date of
being held in custody, the date of completion of the
service of imprisonment,
in the case of a community service order, the type,
period and time of the service, and sentence
imposable for failure to do the service,
in the case of determination of the sentence of
imprisonment in a reform home or rehabilitation
center, the period of stay in such home or center, the
terms and conditions to be complied with and
sentence imposable for failure to comply with such
terms and conditions,
whether the offender can be released on parole or not,
if imprisonment is capable of suspension, the period
of such suspension,
if compensation is to be made, the amount of
compensation, period and procedure for making
compensation, and sentence imposable for failure to
make compensation,
in the case of conditional suspension of sentence for a
child under sub-section (5) of Section 24, sentence
imposable for violation of such condition,
such other necessary matters as the court thinks
appropriate.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Fine
Grounds for determination of sentence of fine: (1) The sentence
of fine for an offence shall be determined, taking into account
such offence and the maximum and minimum amount of fine, in
addition to the other matters set forth in this Act.
In determining the fine pursuant to sub-section (1),
the following matters shall also be taken into account:
the offender's financial status and source of
income,
financial harm caused to other person from the
offence committed by the offender,
benefit received by the offender or his or her family
from the commission of the offence by the
offender,
implications of the fine to the family required to be
maintained by the offender,
the amount of compensation required to be paid to
the victim,
liability likely to be borne by the government due
to non-payment of the fine,
if the offender is a body corporate, the financial
status and transactions of such body,
if an amount is required to be deposited into the
victim relief fund, such amount.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "victim
relief fund" means the victim relief fund under Section 48.
In determining a fine pursuant to sub-section (1), the
fine shall be determined on the basis of the amount in controversy
if such amount is set.
Fine to be so determined as not to be prejudicial to
compensation: If, in imposing a fine pursuant to Section 18, the
fine is to be so imposed that the offender must also pay
compensation to the victim of the offence, the fine shall not be so
imposed that the offender is unable to pay such compensation.
Fine to be paid immediately: (1) The offender must pay
immediately the fine imposed pursuant to this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if such offender, being unable to pay such fine immediately,
furnishes any property as the security for such fine, the court may
order the offender to so pay the fine in a maximum of three
installments that such amount is paid up within one year.
Fine to be so determined as to be payable by each offender: In
determining a fine for more than one offender in relation to any
offence, the fine shall be so determined that each offender has to
pay the fine according to the degree of the offending.
Chapter – 4
Provisions Relating to Community Service
Power to order for community service: (1) If, in relation of an
offender who is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months, having regard also to the offence
committed by the offender, the age, conduct of the offender, the
circumstances and the manner of the commission of the offence, it
appears to the court that it is not appropriate to imprison the
offender, the court may order the offender to do the community
service or to do the community service for the remaining period
after the offender has served the sentence of imprisonment for
such period as the court deems appropriate in relation to such
offence.
The court shall make an order of community service
only if the offender agrees to do the community service.
For the purpose of this Section, the following work
shall be considered as a community service:
doing a public work for free,
serving at a hospital, elderly home, orphanage for
free,
doing environment protection related work for
free,
teaching or serving at a public or community
school for free,
providing or causing to be provided sports
training for free,
doing work at a benevolent organization for free,
appearing before such rehabilitation or reform
organization as designated by the court and doing
such work as specified by such organization.
(4) In making the community service order pursuant to
sub-section (1), the order shall be so made that the offender is
required to do any work under sub-section (3) for a period that is
equal to that of imprisonment imposed on the offender or to that
of imprisonment which remains to be served by the offender.
(5) In determining the period under sub-section (4), the
court shall also specify the hours of work a day to be done by
the offender.
(6) In making an order of community service to be done
by the offender pursuant to sub-section (1), the terms and
conditions to be compiled with by him or her shall also be
specified.
(7) If the offender does the community service under
sub-section (3) in compliance with the terms and conditions
under sub-section (6), the sentence of imprisonment imposed on
him or her shall be deemed to have been served.
(8) The offender shall do the community service under
the supervision of a probation officer or parole officer as
designated by the Probation and Parole Board.
(9) The court shall revoke the order under sub-section
(1) if any offender fails to do the community service set forth in
the order issued pursuant to this Section or does not comply with
the terms and conditions under sub-section (6) or it is known
after the issuance of the order of community service that the
offender had committed any offence previously or the offender
commits any other offence during that period.
(10) After the revocation of the order pursuant to subsection (9), such offender must serve the sentence of
imprisonment imposed on him or her or the remaining period of
imprisonment to be served by him or her in prison.
Chapter – 5
Provisions Relating to Imprisonment
23. Sentence of imprisonment to be imposed if other sentence is not
adequate: Except as otherwise provided in this Act, any offender
shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the event of the sentence of
fine and community service being not adequate.
24. Sentence of imprisonment may be suspended: (1) In cases where
an offender on whom a sentence of imprisonment for less than one
year has been imposed has committed the offence for the first time
and, having regard to the offence committed by the offender, the
age, conduct of the offender, the circumstances and the manner of
the commission of the offence, it appears to the court that it is not
appropriate to imprison the offender, the court may, without
implementing the sentence of imprisonment imposed on such
offender, suspend such imprisonment.
Suspension of the sentence of imprisonment under
sub-section (1) may be made until three years from the date of its
determination.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), no sentence of imprisonment imposed on an offender other than a
child held guilty of any of the following offences may be suspended:
murder,
rape,
human trafficking and transportation,
arms, ammunition and explosive,
corruption,
taking of hostage and kidnapping,
robbery,
counterfeiting of currency or government
stamps,
foreign exchange,
offence relating to narcotic drug trafficking and
transaction,
relating to ancient monument,
relating to forest and wildlife,
organized crime,
money laundering,
offence relating to torture or cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment,
crime against humanity.
In making a order of suspension of the sentence of
imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1), the order shall be so
made that the offender is required to do the following during
the period of suspension:
to do a public work for free,
to assist in any work of the victim of the offence,
to refrain from doing any act or conduct set forth
in such order,
to refrain from moving outside of his or her
residence or any particular place,
to refrain from committing any offence during
the period of sentence or within three years of
the service of such sentence,
to remain within any place specified by the
court,
to remain in a treatment and rehabilitation
center,
to refrain from meeting a particular person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(4), in making suspension of the sentence for a child pursuant to
sub-section (1), decision shall be made as follows, with or without
specifying the terms and conditions, having regard also to his or
her age and the circumstances of the commission of the offence:
that any family member or guardian remind and
counsel him or her of good human conduct,
that any service providing agency or individual
orient the child,
that sole, group or family psychosocial counseling
service be provided to the child,
that the child remain under the guardianship and
supervision of any family member, guardian,
school, service provider individual or organization
for a certain term, subject to the compliance with
the specified terms and conditions.
If the offender complies with the matters set forth in
the order under sub-section (4) during the period of suspension,
the offender shall be deemed to have served the sentence of
imprisonment determined pursuant to sub-section (1).
If the offender violates the order under sub-section
(4), the court shall revoke the order under sub-section (1).
After the order has been revoked pursuant to subsection (7), such offender shall serve the whole of the sentence of
imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.
Power to make order to send offender to reform home: (1) If,
in relation of an offender who is sentenced to imprisonment for a
term of two years or less, having regard also to the offence
committed by the offender, the age, conduct of the offender, the
circumstances and the manner of the commission of the offence, it
appears to the court that it is appropriate to hold him or her in a
reform home instead of sending him or her to prison, the court
may, on recommendation of a probation officer, send such
offender to the reform home.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in subsection (3) of Section 24 shall not be sent to such reform home.
In sending an offender to a reform home pursuant to
sub-section (1), the terms and conditions as determined by the
Probation and Parole Board, to be compiled with by him or her,
shall also be specified.
If the offender serves the term of imprisonment in a
reform home in compliance with the terms and conditions under
sub-section (3), he or she shall be deemed to have served such
term in prison.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the offender does not reform his or her conduct or fails
to comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (3) or
commits any offence punishable by imprisonment during that
period, he or she must serve/spend the whole period of
imprisonment under this Section in prison.
Power to make order to send offender to rehabilitation center:
(1) If, in relation of an offender who is convicted of using narcotic
drug or who is suffering from physical or mental infirmity or
similar other offender, having regard to the offence committed by
the offender, the age, conduct of the offender and the
circumstances of the commission of the offence, it appears to the
court that it is appropriate to send him or her to a rehabilitation
center instead of sending him or her to prison, the court may, on
recommendation of a probation officer, send such offender to the
rehabilitation center.
Explanation:
purpose
Section,
"rehabilitation center" means an organization established with the
aim of providing treatment and rehabilitative services to the
offenders who are drug or other addicts or who are suffering from
physical or mental infirmity.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in subsection (3) of Section 24 shall not be sent to a rehabilitation
center.
In sending an offender to a rehabilitation center
pursuant to sub-section (1), the terms and conditions to be
compiled with by him or her shall also be specified.
If the offender serves the term of imprisonment in a
rehabilitation center in compliance with the terms and conditions
under sub-section (3), he or she shall be deemed to have served
such term of imprisonment in prison.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the offender remaining in a rehabilitation center does
not reform his or her conduct or fails to comply with the terms and
conditions under sub-section (3) or commits any offence
punishable by imprisonment during that period, he or she must
serve/spend the whole period of imprisonment under this Section
in prison.
Service of imprisonment in prison on the weekend or during
the night only: (1) If, in relation of an offender sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, having regard to,
inter alia, the offence committed by the offender, his or her age,
conduct, the gravity of the offence and the manner of the
commission of the offence, it appears to the court that it is not
appropriate to hold him or her regularly in prison, the court may,
for reasons to be recorded, so determine the sentence of
imprisonment that such offender is required to remain in prison
only on the weekend or only during the night on daily basis.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), an offender who has committed any offence set forth in subsection (3) of Section 24 shall not be sentenced to the punishment
under this Section.
In determining the sentence under sub-section (1), the
court my specify the terms and conditions to be compiled with by
the offender.
If the offender held in prison pursuant to sub-section
(1) serves such term of imprisonment in compliance with the
terms and conditions under sub-section (3), he or she shall be
deemed to have served such imprisonment in prison.
If the offender held in prison pursuant to sub-section
(1) fails to comply with the terms and conditions under subsection (3) or commits any offence punishable by imprisonment
during that period, he or she must serve/spend the whole period
of imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.
Power to make order to hold offender in open prison: (1) The
judge of the concerned District Court may, on recommendation of
the chief of Prison Office, make an order to hold in open prison an
offender who has served two-thirds of the term of imprisonment
and has good conduct.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "open prison"
means any place specified by the Government of Nepal in a
manner that a prisoner may work during the specified time even
outside of the place where he or her is held.
In sending an offender to an open prison pursuant to
sub-section (1), terms and conditions to be complied with by the
offender shall also be specified.
If the offender sent to an open prison pursuant to subsection (1) fails to comply with the terms and conditions under
sub-section (2) or commits any offence punishable by
imprisonment during that period, he or she must serve/spend the
whole period of imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.
Power to make order to place offender on parole: (1) The judge
of the District Court may, on recommendation of the concerned
District Probation and Parole Board, make an order to place on
parole an offender who, upon being sentenced to imprisonment for
more than one year, has served two-thirds of the sentence and has
good conduct.
Provided that the following offender may not be placed on
parole:
One who has been sentenced to life imprisonment,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
corruption,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
rape,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
human trafficking and transportation,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
organized crime,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
money laundering,
One who has been sentenced for an offence
related to torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment,
One who has been sentenced for the offence of
crime against humanity,
One who has been sentenced for an offence
relating to the crime against the state.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "parole"
means permission for a prisoner who has served two-thirds
of the term of the sentence of imprisonment imposed on him
or her to serve the remaining term by spending life in the
society, subject to the compliance with the specified terms
and conditions, under the supervision of the parole officer.
In making an order pursuant to sub-section (1), the
terms and conditions so determined by the Probation and Parole
Board as to be complied with by such offender during the period
of parole shall also be specified.
The parole officer shall monitor whether or not the
offender has complied with the terms and conditions under subsection (2).
If the offender on parole under sub-section (1)
complies with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2), the
sentence of imprisonment imposed on him or her shall be deemed
to have been served.
If the offender on parole under sub-section (1) fails to
comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2) or
commits any offence punishable by imprisonment during that
period, he or she must serve/spend the remaining period of
imprisonment imposed on him or her in prison.
Other provisions relating to parole shall be as
prescribed.
To have socialization: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act and other law, a prison may release an offender who,
upon being sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one
year, is serving the sentence and bears good conduct, from prison
on monthly or daily basis, for the following purpose, six months
before the expiry of the term of imprisonment imposed on him or
family reunion,
establishment of social, cultural relation,
social assimilation and rehabilitation,
carrying on a business or employment,
taking skill or employment-oriented training.
In releasing an offender from prison pursuant to subsection (1), terms and conditions to be complied with by such
offender shall also be specified.
In releasing an offender pursuant to sub-section (1),
the period and time to be spent for such purpose shall also be
specified.
The person released pursuant to sub-section (1) shall
submit a weekly report on the work he or she has done to the
concerned prison.
If a person released pursuant to sub-section (1) fails
to comply with the terms and conditions under sub-section (2) or
commits any offence during that period, he or she shall
serve/spend the remaining period of imprisonment in prison.
Engagement in physical labor in lieu of imprisonment: (1) If an
offender who is above the age of 18 and physically fit, and has
been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three years or more
so desires, the offender may be engaged in physical labor for
public work.
The sentence of imprisonment imposed on an
offender who is engaged in physical labor for public work
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be deducted by additional one day
in lieu of the labor done for every three days.
Other provisions relating to engagement in physical
labor for public work shall be as prescribed.
Prisoner may be allowed to leave prison: A prison may, in the
following circumstance, permit a prisoner who, upon being
sentenced to imprisonment, is serving the sentence of
imprisonment in the prison to go out of the prison with necessary
security:
in the event of a close relative having fallen ill,
to visit such patient on condition that he or she
shall return to the prison on the same day,
in the event of the death of a relative of whom
crematory or obsequies rites have to be
performed by the prisoner himself or herself, to
perform such crematory or obsequies rites on
condition that he or she shall return to the
prison on the specified day.
Reformative programs to be conducted: (1) In order to reform
the conduct of prisoners serving the sentences of imprisonment, a
prison shall conduct reformative programs and measures,
including skill, education and employment oriented, morality,
disciplinary, physical, spiritual, meditation and exercise related
education programs.
A prison shall, in every sixth months, submit to the
Probation and Parole Board a report setting out whether or not the
prisoners have made significant reforms in their conduct as a
result of the programs and measures conducted pursuant to subsection (1).
Other provisions relating to reformative programs
shall be as prescribed.
Prisoner to be kept in hospital or similar other place: (1) If
any offender sentenced to imprisonment pursuant to this Act
becomes of unsound mind, the prison shall keep such offender in
a hospital or similar other medical center.
The period during which an offender is kept in a
hospital or medical center pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
included in the period of the sentence of imprisonment served by
the offender.
Computation of fractions of sentence: In imposing a fraction
of sentence under this Act, a sentence of imprisonment for life
shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for twenty-five
years and the fraction of sentence thereof shall be imposed and
executed in accordance with law.
Execution of sentence of imprisonment imposed for different
offences: In imposing the sentence of imprisonment for more
than one offence on a person who, upon being sentenced to
imprisonment, is serving the sentence of imprisonment, the
sentence of imprisonment shall be imposed and executed as
follows:
where
period
sentence
imprisonment under the previous judgment is
longer than or equal to that of imprisonment
under the latter judgment, the sentence of
imprisonment imposed under the previous
judgment shall be executed;
where
period
sentence
imprisonment under the latter judgment is
longer than that of imprisonment under the
previous judgment, the period of the sentence
of imprisonment under the latter judgment
shall be added to the extent it is longer than the
previous judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if a sentence of imprisonment is imposed for another offence
on a person who is sentenced to imprisonment for any offence
prior to completion of the previous sentence, the latter sentence of
imprisonment shall be so executed as to be computed after the
completion of the period of the previous imprisonment.
Where a person is sentenced, in the same case, to
various sentences of imprisonment for various offences in
accordance with the laws in force, only the sentence of
imprisonment for the offence which is the longest of such
sentences shall be executed.
If the sentences of imprisonment imposed under subsection (3) are equal, only one of such sentences shall be executed.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, where a separate sentence is provided by law for a
recidivist or a consolidated offence, such sentence shall be
executed.
Remission of imprisonment: If an offender, except the following
offender, has served three-fourth of the sentence of imprisonment
and has reformed his or her conduct while in prison, the prison
may make remission as prescribed from the sentence of
imprisonment passed on him or her:
(a) one who has been sentenced to imprisonment for life,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of rape,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of
corruption,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of human
trafficking and transportation,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of taking
of hostage and kidnapping,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of
organized crime,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of money
laundering,
one who has been sentenced for an offence related to
torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment,
one who has been sentenced for the offence of crime
against humanity.
Probation and Parole Board: (1) There shall be a Federal
Probation and Parole Board, as follows, also to render assistance
in the social rehabilitation and integration of the offenders
sentenced to imprisonment:
Attorney General
- Chairperson
Secretary, Ministry of Law,
Justice
Parliamentary
Affairs
- Member
Secretary, Ministry of Home
Affairs
- Member
Two psychologists, including
one woman to the extent of
availability, designated by the
concerned Ministry
- Member
Inspector General, Nepal
Police
- Member
Criminologist or penologist
designated by the concerned
Ministry
- Member
Director General, Department
of Prison Management
- Member Secretary
There shall be a State Probation and Parole Board as
follows in each State, which is under the direct guidance, control
and supervision of the Probation and Parole Board:
Chief Attorney
- Chairman
Secretary, State Ministry of
- Member
Secretary, State Ministry of
Home Affairs
- Member
Chief of Police, State Police
(e) Two psychologists, including
one woman to the extent of
availability, designated by the
State Government
- Member
Criminologist or penologist
designated by the State
Government
- Member
Chief of the State body
responsible for prison
management
- Member Secretary
Functions, duties and powers of Probation and Parole Board:
(1) In addition to the functions, duties and powers mentioned
elsewhere in this Act, the functions, duties and powers of the
Federal Probation and Parole Board shall be as follows:
to formulate a probation and parole policy and
recommend it to the Government of Nepal,
to develop standards for placing prisoners on
probation and parole,
to develop terms and conditions to be abided by the
offenders who are released on probation and parole,
to supervise, control activities of, and give direction,
as required, to the State Probation and Parole Board,
to prepare a roster of persons who can be appointed
or designated as the probation officer or parole
officer, as required to make recommendation as to the
execution of sentences and to assist in the
rehabilitation of offenders pursuant to this Act,
to carry out other necessary matters relating to
probation and parole.
The Probation and Parole Board shall, on its own,
determine the rules of procedures required for the performance of
its functions.
The Probation and Parole Board may, as required,
form a sub-committee to render assistance in its functions.
The terms of reference, rules of procedures and other
necessary matters of a sub-committee formed pursuant to subsection (3) shall be as specified by the Probation and Parole
Board.
The functions, duties and powers of the State
Probation and Parole Board shall be as prescribed.
Computation of period of imprisonment: (1) The period of
imprisonment shall be computed from the date of custody or
detention of the offender, if so held in custody or detention, and
from the date that the offender is held in prison, if not held in
custody or detention.
The period of imprisonment under sub-section (1)
shall not include the day of release from detention or prison.
Chapter – 6
Provision Relating to Compensation
Payment of compensation to be ordered: (1) If any injury is
caused to the victim's body, life, property or reputation as a result
of any offence, the court shall order that a reasonable amount of
compensation be paid by the offender to the victim for such injury.
Provided that if a law provides for a separate compensation
for any offence, the law shall apply accordingly.
The amount of compensation under sub-section (1)
shall be determined, having regard to the following matters:
physical, bodily, mental and emotional injury
caused to the victim,
where the victim has died, the injury caused to
his or her heir,
the offender's financial source and condition,
condition of the victim and his or her dependant,
other
matters
Court
holds
appropriate.
The amount of compensation under sub-section (1)
shall be ordered to include the medical expenses if the victim has
sustained hurt or grievous hurt as a result of the offence, and the
funeral and obsequies expenses, if the victim has died.
Where an offender has caused damage to the
victim's property, the court shall, in ordering the payment of
compensation, order that such property be restituted in its
original position.
If a property cannot be restituted in its original
position, the amount of compensation shall be ordered to be paid
according to the price of such property where the price is set, and
where the price cannot be so set, according to the price of such
property that can be set at the time when damage was caused to it
or the sentence passed.
Payment of compensation may be ordered to be in
cash or kind or both.
If the victim of an offence has died prior to the
payment of compensation pursuant to sub-section (1), the amount
of compensation under sub-section (1) shall be ordered to be paid
to his or her dependent heir.
Compensation to be paid immediately: (1) The offender shall
immediately pay the amount of compensation passed under this
Section.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if such person, being unable to pay the compensation
immediately, furnishes any property as the security for such
compensation, the court may order the offender to so pay the
compensation in a maximum of three installments that such
amount is paid up within one year.
Compensation to be borne by each offender: In making an
order for the payment of compensation for more than one offender
in relation to any offence, such order shall be so made that each
offender pay the compensation according to the degree of the
offending.
To be as per agreement: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, the victim and the offender can enter
into agreement on payment of compensation in relation to any
offence.
If the agreement under sub-section (1) is found
reasonable, the court may make order for the compensation as per
such agreement.
Imprisonment for non-payment of compensation: (1) If an
offender who is required to pay compensation does not pay the
amount of compensation within the period specified for its
payment, compensation shall be ordered to be paid to the victim
by making attachment to such offender's property.
If the amount of compensation cannot be recovered
from the property attached pursuant to sub-section (1) or if the
offender required to pay compensation fails to do so, he or she
shall be imprisoned by converting the amount of compensation
into imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees for a day.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and
the other laws, imprisonment under sub-section (2) shall not
exceed four years.
Chapter – 7
Miscellaneous
Sentence Recommendation Committee: There shall be a
Sentence Recommendation Committee, as follows, also for the
making of sentencing policy:
Attorney General
- Chairman
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs
- Member
Inspector General, Nepal Police
- Member
One person designated by the
Government of Nepal from amongst the
persons having gained at lest fifteen
years of experience in the field of crime
investigation or the penologists
- Member
One person designated by the
Government of Nepal from amongst the
persons having gained at least ten years
of experience in the rehabilitation of
offenders
- Member
Functions, duties and powers of the Committee: (1) The
functions, duties and powers of the Committee shall be as
follows:
to develop standards for the determination of
appropriate range of sentence to be imposed on
the offender according to the gravity of offence,
to conduct study and research the on prevailing
penal policy and give suggestion to the
Government of Nepal for reform thereof,
to make opinion, advice and suggestion on
sentence to be imposed in relation to any specific
type of offences,
to collect, update and analyze data/records of the
offenders and give suggestion to the Government
of Nepal on punishment,
if there appears a need for making any reform in
the laws in force on punishment, to give
suggestion to the Government of Nepal for that
purpose.
The Committee shall, on its own, determine the rules
of procedures required for the performance of its functions.
The Committee may, as required, form a subcommittee to render assistance in its functions.
The terms of reference, rules of procedures and other
necessary matters of a sub-committee formed pursuant to subsection (3) shall be as specified by the Committee.
Victim relief fund to be established: (1) There shall be
established a fund entitled the victim relief fund for the provision
of relief to the victim of offence.
The Government of Nepal shall credit into the fund
established pursuant to sub-section (1) fifty percent of the amount
recovered for a fine under the court or of the amount paid by an
offender sentenced to imprisonment as a fine in lieu of such
imprisonment, in accordance with the Penal Code.
In addition to the amount to be credited pursuant to
sub-section (2), any amount as so provided by law or received
from the Government of Nepal or any other source shall be
credited into the fund under sub-section (1).
The operation of the fund under sub-section (1),
classification of victims, grounds for the provision of relief
amount to the victims from the fund, limits of such amount and
procedure for its distribution shall be as prescribed.
Designation of probation officer or social activist: (1) The
Government of Nepal may appoint or designate those persons who
are experienced in rehabilitation or community service as the
probation officer or parole officer.
The qualification, terms of service and facilities of
the probation officer or parole officer under sub-section (1) shall
be as prescribed.
Power to make rules: The rules may be framed by the Supreme
Court on the matters relating to court proceedings and by the
Government of Nepal on the other matters, as required to
implement the objectives of this Act.
Power to make manuals: The Government of Nepal may make
and enforce necessary manuals subject to this Act and the Rules
framed hereunder.

===== SOURCE: Nepal Medical Council Act, 2020 (1964).pdf =====

Nepal Medical Council Act, 2020 (1964)
Amending Acts: Authentication and Date of Publication:
2020/11/16 (Feb. 28, 1964)
Nepal Medical Council (First Amendment)
Act, 2044 (1987)
2044/6/9 (Sept. 25, 1987)
Nepal Medical Council (Second Amendment)
Act, 2047 (1990)
2047/6/27 (Oct. 13, 1990)
Nepal Medical Council (Third Amendment)
Act, 2055 (1999)
2056/1/2 (April 15, 1999)
Health Related Some Nepal Acts Amendment
Act, 2058 (2001)
2058/5/6 (Aug. 22, 2001)
Act No. 35 of the Year 2020 (1964)
AN ACT MADE TO CONSTITUTE AND MANAGE THE NEPAL
MEDICAL COUNCIL
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to manage qualification of Medical
practitioner and also for the registration of Medical practitioner qualified in
modern medicine for the scientific utilization of modern medicine throughout
Nepal;
Now therefore, His Majesty's King Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev, has
made this Act, with an advice and consent of the Rastriya Panchayat.
Short title, extent and commencement: (1) This Act may be called as
"Nepal Medical Council Act, 2020 (1964)".
(2) This Act shall come into force all over Nepal.
(3) Section 1 of this Act shall come into force immediately and
other Sections of this Act shall come into force at such area and from
such date as Government of Nepal may, by a Notification in the Nepal
Gazette, appoint.
 Notice of commencement of the Act:
Sections 2,3,4,5,6,9,,10,11,12,21,32 and 33 of the Act have been implemented from 2022/5/2
(Aug. 28, 1965) by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette on 2022/5/28 (Sept. 13, 1965).
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this
Act, -
"Council" means the Nepal Medical Council established
pursuant to Section 3.
(a1) "Chairperson" means Chairperson of the Council.
(a2) "Member" means member of the Council and this term also
includes Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.
(b) "Hospital" means an agency operated by Government of Nepal
or Nongovernmental level providing health services for
treatment, prevention, diagnosis and rehabilitation from diseases
and this term also includes a recognized institution established
with the objective of carrying out or caused to be carried out
study, teaching at least bachelors level and to provide or cause
to provide be given training in medical science.
"Modern medicine" means the medicine of allopathic.
(d) "Medical practitioner" means a person who has obtained
bachelor's degree from the recognized institution in the medical
science under modern medical system and engaged in the
concerned profession.
(d1) "Specialist Medical Practitioner" means a Medical practitioner
who has obtained Masters Degree, honor and diploma from the
recognized educational institution in the concerned subject as
Other all Sections to be implemented other than Section 26 of the Act have been implemented
from 2033/12/7 (March 20, 1977 by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette on 2023/12/7 (March
20, 1967).

Section 26 of the Act has been implemented in Towan Panchayat areas of Kathmandu and
Biratnagar from 2034/4/1 (July 16, 1977) by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette on 2034/3/20
(July 4, 1977).

Section 26 of the Act has been implemented all over Nepal as per the Notification in the Nepal
Gazette dated 2048/9/15 (Dec. 30, 1991).
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
well engaged in the concerned profession after obtaining special
training as prescribed.
(d2) "Medical college" means an educational institution established
with the objective of providing or causing of providing study of
bachelor or master's degree or post graduate training in the
modern medical science completely and this term also includes
the medical institution and Dental College established for such
purpose.
(e) "Register book" means the Register book maintained to register
the name of Medical practitioner under this Act.
"Registered Medical Practitioner" means the Medical practitioner
whose name has been registered in the Registration book.
(f1) "Recognized" means recognized under this Act.
"Registrar" means the Registrar of the Council appointed
pursuant to Section 12 of the Act.
"Rule" means the Rules framed under this Act.
"Bye-laws" means the Bye-laws framed by the Council under
this Act.
(j) "Prescribed or as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed
in the Rules or Bye-laws framed under this Act.
Establishment of the Council: (1) A Council named the Nepal
Medical Council shall be established.
(2) The Council shall be an autonomous and corporate body
with a perpetual succession. The Council shall have a separate seal of its
own for all its activities.
(3) The Council may acquire, hold, transfer or leas movable and
immovable properties and carry out or caused to be carried out other all
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
functions as deemed appropriate in order to fulfill the objective of this
(4) The Council may, as an individual, sue or be sued.
Constitution of the Council: The Council constituted pursuant to

Section 3 shall have the members as follows:
Nominated by Government of Nepal from among
the Medical practitioner who has experience of at
least of Twenty years as registered medical
practitioner and obtained at least of Master's degree
in the subject of medicine -
Chairperson
One Medical practitioner send by the registered
Medical practitioners, upon holding an election as
prescribed from among the registered Medical
practitioner having experience of at least of Fifteen
years -
Vice-chairperson
Chairperson, Nepal Medical Council -
Member
One person nominated by Government of Nepal
from among the Dean or Rector of the University or
Health Science Academy where concerned subject
to the modern medical science is studied -
Member
One person nominated by Government of Nepal
from among the consumers -
Member
Eight Medical practitioners elected as prescribed
from among the registered medical practitioners -
Member
Chairperson,
Association
Nepal
Dental
Practitioners -
Member
Three persons nominated by Government of Nepal
from among the medical practitioner who has
obtained at least of Master's degree on the subject
Amended by Health Related Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2058 (2001)
concerned with the medicine other than the Dental
Practitioners -
Members
Two persons nominated by Government of Nepal
from among the Dental Practitioners who has
obtained at least of Master's degree -
Member
Tenure of Office of the Member: (1) The tenure of office of the
nominated or elected members of the Council shall be of four years.
After termination of the tenure of office, they may be re-nominated or
re-elected.
Provided that the member nominated by Government of Nepal
may be removed from the membership by Government of Nepal
showing reasonable reason.
(2) In cases where the position of any member falls vacant before
the termination of tenure of office, other member shall be nominated or
elected for the remaining period.
Disqualification for Membership: (1) Any of the following persons
shall be deemed to be disqualified for nomination or election or to
continue as a member of the Council:
Who is not a Nepali Citizen,
Whose name has been removed from the Register Book,
Who has been convicted and sentenced by the court in a criminal
offence involving moral turpitude,
Who has not completed five years from the date of obtaining of
MBBS or the degree equivalent to such degree #or B.D.S or the
degree equivalent to such degree.
Provided that, the disqualification prescribed in this Clause
shallonly be applicable in the case of the member elected pursuant to
Clause #.... (f) of Sub-section (1) of the Section 4.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Condition for Termination of Membership: The membership of the
Council shall be deemed to have been terminated on the following
condition:
In case of death,
If disqualified to continue membership under Section 5,
If the resignation tendered from the post of a member is
approved,
If he/she is absent in more than three consecutive meetings of the
Council
without
informing
Council
with reasoned
information thereof.
Provided that, the Council may give permission to any member to
remain absent from the meeting of the Council for a maximum period of
Six months.
7A. Functions, duties and powers of the Council: (1) Functions, duties
and powers of the Council shall be as follows:
To give recognition as prescribed to the Medical
College which provides or cause to provide study,
teaching and training in medical science.
To make recommendation for cancellation of
registration and approval in cases where it has been
found not compliance at the time of evaluation and
review of prescribed policy of the curriculum, terms
of admission and examination system and other
infrastructures and other matters of standards of the
Medical College which provides or cause to provide
study, teaching and training in medical science.
Amended by Health Related Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2058 (2001)
Amended by Health Related Some Nepal Acts Amendment Act, 2058 (2001)
Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
To determine policy as required for smooth operation
of the medical profession.
issue
registration
license
determining
qualification
Medical
practitioner and
conducting prescribed Licensing Examination for the
qualified Medical practitioner.
To prepare code of conduct of the Medical
practitioner as prescribed and remove the name of a
Medical practitioner from the Registration book after
taking actions as prescribed against the Medical
practitioner who has breached such a code of
conduct.
(2) Government of Nepal shall make consultation with the
Council prior to give approval to establish and operate any Medical
College and the Council shall examine whether such Medical College
has completed the standards and infrastructures pursuant to Clause (b)
of Sub-section (1) or not and if found completed such standards and
infrastructures, the Council shall only give opinion in regard to give
approval to establish and operate Medical college and Government of
Nepal shall give approval to establish and operate Medical College on
the basis of such opinion of the Council.
7B. Meeting and decision of the Council: The procedure relating to the
meetings and decision of the Council shall be as prescribed.
To be published in the Nepal Gazette: The name of each member
who has been nominated or elected in the Council or removed from
by the Council shall be published in the Nepal Gazette.
Act and proceedings not to be invalid: If an act and proceeding has
been carried out owing to vacancy of position of any member or being
or having nominated or selected unqualified person, the act and
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
proceeding of the Council shall not be deemed to be invalid owing to
the reason thereof.
10. Meeting allowance and other facilities: Meeting allowance and other
facilities of the members shall be as determined/fixed by the Council
with the prior approval of Government of Nepal.
11. Committee may be constituted: (1) In exercise the power conferred to
the Council by this Act or the Rules or Bye-laws framed thereunder,
the Council may constitute various subject Committees.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the Committee shall be
as determined by the Council.
12. Registrar and employee: (1) Government of Nepal may appoint or
nominate a person in order to function as a Registrar under this Act or
Rules framed thereunder and assign a person to carry out all functions
to be carried out by him/her in his/her absence.
(2) The Registrar appointed pursuant to Sub-section (1) or the
person assigned in his/her absence shall carry out the functions of the
Secretary of the Council and the Committee pursuant to Section 11 and
such a person shall have power to participate in the discussion to be
made in the meeting of the Committee or Council but shall not have
power to caste a vote.
(3) If a Registrar appointed pursuant to Sub-section (1) needs to
be removed or suspended or imposed other penalty it shall be done
under the Rules framed under this Act.
(4) The Council may appoint officer and employees as required
with the approval of Government of Nepal.
(5) All the officer and employees appointed pursuant to Subsection (4) shall be under the control and supervision of the Registrar.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
Functions and duties of the Registrar: (1) To register in the
Registration book stipulating the name, address and qualification of
Medical practitioner to be registered from time to time under this Act,
Rule and ordinary or special order of the Council by maintaining up to
date the Registration book, to remove the name of deceased Medical
Practitioner from membership to be removed owing to death and it shall
be the duty of the Registrar to carry out all other functions to be
carried out by him/her under this Act and Rules thereunder.
(2) If any registered medical practitioner refrains from his /her
profession or changes his/her address, the notice thereof shall be
required to be given to the Registrar within One month. If there is a
ground for doubt that a Medical practitioner has changed his/her
address or refrained him/her from the profession, the Registrar shall
send …..... a letter in the address maintained in the Registration book;
in cases such a letter returns or a reply is received within Three months
of delivery of such a letter, the name of such a Medical practitioner
shall be notified by publishing a notice in a major newspaper by the
Registrar and if any information is not received within next Three
months, the Registrar may remove his/her name from the Registration
book.
Provided that, if someone submitted an application to the
Registrar stating that the letter sent by the Registrar is not received on
time or reply could not be furnished on time beyond the circumstance of
his/her control or due to any other reason or showing the reason for restarting of such profession, the Registrar may re-register the name of
such a Medical practitioner in the Registration book who has been
removed under this Sub-section and the fee as prescribed shall be
chargeable for the registration made in such a way.
Omitted by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
(3) The Registration Book prepared established under this
Section shall be recognized as goods as the governmental document.
14. Name to be registered in register: (1) An application in the format as
prescribed along with the fee as prescribed shall be required to be
furnished to the Council for registration of the name in the Registration
book by the person who has obtained qualification as mentioned in the
Schedule under this Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
(2) While scrutinizing on the application pursuant to Subsection (1) by the Council, if it has been found as per rule, the name of
such a person shall be registered temporarily for Two years in the
Registered Book and issued certificate of such registration.
(3) The persons from among the persons registered temporarily in
the Registration book pursuant to Sub-section (2) , and employed in the
service of Government of Nepal and who have gone abroad to study on
the scholarship obtained to Government of Nepal shall be required to
carry out medical profession in a place and up to the period fixed by
the Ministry of Health.
(4) After having medical profession up to Two years by aperson
other than the person as mentioned in Sub-section (3), the Council after
having registered the name in the Registration book permanently and
shall issue the certificate thereof.
(5) On the recommendation of the Ministry of Health the name of
a person who has worked up to the period as fixed pursuant to Subsection (3), the Council shall register the name of such person in the
Registration book permanently and shall issue the certificate thereof.
(6) If the Council has assumed the opinion that the other person
also has obtained the minimum qualification in the medical science
other than the qualification as mentioned in the Schedule and made
recommendation accordingly by the Council and the Ministry of Health
Amended by the First Amendment.
has given directives to register the name of such person under this
Section, the Council shall register the name of such person in the
Registration book and issue the certificate thereof.
(7) The provision relating to registration of foreign citizens in the
Council shall be as prescribed.
Process of application: (1) All applications submitted for registration
of the name in the Registration book pursuant to Sub-section (1) of

Section 14 shall be sent directly to the Registrar and the Registrar shall
also be required to submit all the applications to the Committee
prescribed by the Council for the purpose of this Act.
(2) The Committee shall make enquiry as regards whether or not
the applicant is the person qualified as set forth in the Schedule and
whether or not his/her application has been duly completed and the
Committee shall submit its report in detail to the Council.
(3) After having consideration over the report submitted by the
Committee, the Council shall do as follows:
To give directive for registration of the name of the
applicant in the event that the applicant is a
qualified person as set forth in the Schedule and
his/her application has been duly completed and
he/she has paid the fees as prescribed in the Rule so
concerned.
To deny for registration of the name of the
applicant in the Registration book in the event that
any application has not been duly completed or has
not been deposited fees by the applicant or the
applicant has not been qualified as set forth in the
Schedule and notify the applicant stating the reason
thereof.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
(4) If the name of any applicant could not be registered in the
Registration book under Clause (b) of Sub-section (3), owing to duly
non-completion of the application to be completed duly or nondeposition of fees by the applicant and such applicant has submitted
other duly completed application or depositing fees, his/her name shall
not be denied to register in the Registration book owing only for the
reason of earlier denial.
(5) If the Council has made directive to register the name of an
applicant pursuant to Clause (a) of Sub-section (3), the Registrar having
registered the name of such person in the Registration book, issue
him/her a certificate thereof.
Certificate, information and details required to be given while
registering the name: The person whose name has to be registered in
the Registration book pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 14 or the
persons submitting an application for the registration of the name in the
Registration book under Sub-section (1) of the said Section shall be
required to furnish the following evidence, details and information to
the Registrar:
(a) The degree, certificate of educational qualification and other
evidence as well documents prescribed and deemed necessary by
the Council.
If his/her name has been registered in the Registration book of
any foreign Medical Council or Council or the institution
equivalent to that, the details of that stating his/her qualification,
degree, registration number and the date of registration in such
Registration book.
Letter of Oath purporting that he/she shall carry out the duties
under this Act and the Rules.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
Power of the Council to give order to delete name from the
Registration book and re-registration: (1) The Council may issue an
order to remove the name of any registered Medical practitioner from
the Registration book in the circumstances as follows:
If convicted and sentenced by the Court in a
criminal offence involving moral turpitude, or
If decided by two third majority vote of members of
the Council accusing of any misconduct relating to
the profession.
(2) If the person, whose name has been removed from the
Registration book pursuant to Sub-section (1), applies for re-registration
of his/her name in the Register book showing reasonable grounds to the
Council, the Council may, if it is satisfied for registration of his/her
name, order the Registrar to register his/her name in the Registration
book after recovering the fee as prescribed as regards this and in cases
where such directive has been given, the Registrar having so registered
shall also issue a certificate thereof.
Provided that, in a case where the name has been removed
from the Registration book under this Act, his/her name shall not be
registered under this Sub-section without being completed the period of
at least of Two years of removal of such name.
Dissolution of the Council: (1) If Government of Nepal deems that the
Council has been unable to exercise or frequently misused or exercised
in excess of its powers conferred to it or unable to perform its duties
under this Act or the Rule, Government of Nepal shall give information
to the Council to reform or correct the matter thereof.
(2) If the reformation or correction could not be made in its acts
and proceeding by the Council according to the notice given under Subsection (1), Government of Nepal may dissolve the Council and
Inserted by the First Amendment.
constitute Interim Executive Council until the constitution of the
Council in order to carry out the functions to be carried out by the
Council under this Act and the Rules and Bye-laws framed thereunder.
(3) After dissolution of the Council under Sub-section (2) the
Interim Executive Council shall keep the fund and property of the
Council in its responsibilities and hand over such fund and property to
the newly constituted Council after constitution of the new Council.
(4) Government of Nepal shall, normally within Three months of
the dissolution of the Council under Sub-section (2), require to
constitute the new Council pursuant to Section 4.
Appeal: (1) Any one dissatisfied or the act and proceedings carried out
by the Registrar may file an appeal in the Council within Thirty five
days against such decision or act and proceedings.
(2) Any one dissatisfied with the decision made by the Council
may file an appeal before the Court of Appeal within Thirty-five days of
the date of decision.
20. Removal of the name from the Registration book: The Council shall
constitute five members Enquiry Committee in order to carry out
enquiry and submit report in the following conditions and on the basis
of the report submitted by such Committee, the Council may remove
the name of such person from the Registration book:
If the name of any person has been registered owing to fraud or
mistake,
If any registered Medical practitioner has become incapable to
carry out medical profession owing to mentally incapable.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
21. Recognition from Government of Nepal: (1) The Council may
grant recognition to the Degrees, Diplomas, Certificate or other honours
as regards the medical science.
(1a) The Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates and other honors
recognized by the Council pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be
incorporated in the Schedule.
(2)Any person who has obtained Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates
or other honours from the foreign institution as regards to medical
science, shall be required to give an application to the Council as
prescribed for the registration of such honours.
(3) After having consultation with the Council against the
application so submitted pursuant to Sub-section (2), the Council may
give recognition to such Degrees, Diplomas and Certificate or honours.
The Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates or honours so recognized shall be
incorporated in the Schedule.
21A. Demand of details may be made: The Council may, from time to
time, demand from the medical institutions granting such Medical
Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates or other honours, which have been
recognized pursuant to Sub-section (1) of Section 21, all particulars
relating to curricula prescribed therefor and the conditions prescribed
for admission therein and it shall be the duty of such institution to
provide such particulars.
21B. Inspection of examination: (1) The Council may appoint and depute
the Inspector for inspection of examinations conducted for the Degree,
Diploma, Certificate or other honors recognized pursuant to Subsection (1) of Section 21. The Inspector so appointed shall submit his
Inserted by the Second Amendment
Inserted by the Second Amendment
/her report in respect of the examination inspected by him/her to the
Council containing the particulars prescribed by the Council.
Provided that, the Inspector shall not be entitled to intervene by
any means in any examination inspected by him/her.
(2) In consideration of the particulars received under Section
21a. or the report submitted by the Inspector under Sub-section (1), if
the Council is satisfied that curricula, conditions of admission and the
process of conducting examinations prescribed by the concerned
medical institution in respect of any Degree, Diploma, Certificate or
honors recognized under Sub-section (1) of Section 21, is not
satisfactory and inadequate, the Council may submit its report to the
university or educational institution obtained affiliation of the
concerned medical institution in respect thereof.
21C. Abrogation of recognition: (1) The concerned university or
educational institution having conducted investigation required and
following the process as prescribed against the report so obtained
pursuant to Sub-section (2) of Section 21b., shall furnish its opinion to
Government of Nepal.
(2) After having consultation with the Council as regards to
opinion and findings obtained from the university or educational
institution pursuant to Sub-section (1), Government of Nepal shall issue
directives as required to the Council as regards to such medical
institution.
(3) The Council shall decide as required as per the directives
issued by Government of Nepal pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) The decision made by the Council pursuant to Sub-section
(3) to abrogate recognition of such medical institution from the
Schedule or the Degree, Diploma, Certificate or other honors provided
after any certain specific date from such medical institution in order to
Amended by the Third Amendment.
abrogate recognition from the Schedule shall be published in the Nepal
Gazette.
21D. Special examination may be conducted: Prior to the registration of
the Medical practitioner invested to register their name in the Council
under this Act, the Council may conduct examination as prescribed in
order to maintain standard as required in the medical science.
22................
23...............
24................
Legal suit and other legal actions may not be made: Unless
otherwise provided in this Act or the Rules, any legal suit or other legal
actions shall not lie in any Court against the act and proceedings
carried out by Government of Nepal or the Council or Registrar in
exercise of the power conferred by this Act or the Rules.
Restriction to carry out medical profession by the person whose
name has not been registered in the Register book: (1) No one shall
be allowed to carry out medical profession directly or indirectly other
than the registered Medical practitioner.
(1a) Subject to the Drugs Act, 2035 (1978), the person whose
name has been registered in the Professional Council Relating to Health
constituted under the prevailing laws shall be allowed to carry out the
medical profession as prescribed by the publication of notice in the
Nepal Gazette by Government of Nepal.
(2) ..............
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Repealed by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Omitted by the First Amendment
(3) If any one has committed offence against this Section, such a
person shall be punished with an imprisonment up to Three years or a
fine up to Three Thousand Rupees or both.
Punishment for using honours relating to medical qualification:
(1) No one shall be allowed to mention or cause to mention the Degree,
Diploma, Certificate or honor relating to modern medicine which is not
obtained by him/her therewith his/her name with a motive of carrying
out the treatment (medical service) relating to modern medicine.
(2) If any one has been found guilty of the offence against Subsection (1), such person shall be punished with an imprisonment up to
Three years or a fine up to Three Thousand Rupees or both.
Case may be filed: (a) If the Council has an opinion that the case is
required to be filed against any person or institution who has violated
the provision of this Act, the Council having adoption of a resolution
thereof shall submit to Government of Nepal.
(b) Government of Nepal may give authority in writing to any
official in order to carry out proceedings of such case.
Regarding issuance of certificate by the registered Medical
practitioner: The Medical practitioner shall have the rights to carry out
the acts as follows:
To affix signature in the birth and death certificate according to
the prevailing laws,
To sign and affix the seal in the certificate relating to medicine or
physical and mental fitness as per law and issue certificate.
..............
30A. Delegation of Authority: (1) The power conferred to Government of
Nepal under this Act, may be delegated to the Chief of other any body
or institution other than the Council or Chief of the Council.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Repealed by the Third Amendment.
(2) The power conferred to the Council under this Act or the
Rules or Bye-laws framed thereunder, may be delegated to the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, member, Committee members, Registrar
or other any officer employee of the Council.
31. Changes and modification to be made in the Schedule: Government
of Nepal, with the consultation of the Council and publication of notice
in the Nepal Gazetteer, may change and modify in the Schedule.
Power to frame rules: (1) Government of Nepal may, with the
consultation of the Council frame the Rules for the implementation of
the objective of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the effectiveness of the
power conferred by Sub-section (1), such Rules may make provision in
the matters as follows:
To fix the meeting of the Council and its procedure,
To fix the mode of election of the members of the
Council pursuant to Section 4,
To fix the powers and duties of the Chairperson
and members of the Council,
To arrange the fund, wealth and property of the
Council,
To give remuneration to the Chairperson and
members,
To arrange for the terms of service, salary,
allowance, punishment and removal of the
Registrar and other employees,
To fix the form of the Registration book of the
registered Medical practitioner to be maintained
under this Act,
To publish the list relating to medical treatment,
Inserted by the Third Amendment.
Amended by the Third Amendment.
To determine fee to be recovered under this Act
and format of the application,
To fix the mode of constitution of the Committees
and duties and powers of such Committees,
To maintain account book,
To collect and publish register book,
To fix the mode of appeal by the Council against
the decision of the Registrar,
To arrange other matters as required in order to
carry out smooth operation of the functions of the
Council.
Bye-laws: The Council may frame Bye-laws in order to carry out other
functions and matters as required under this Act and the Rules and such
Bye-laws shall be required to be approved by Government of Nepal.

===== SOURCE: Nepal_Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment)(2008) .pdf =====

Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act, 2008, Nepal
(Unofficial translation by FWLD)
A Bill made for providing measures to control the act of Domestic Violence
Preamble: Respecting the right of every person to live a secure and dignified life; to prevent and
control violence occurring within the family and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto
making such violence punishable; and for providing protection to the victims of violence; Be it enacted
by the Constituent Assembly in accordance with Article 81(1) of the Interim Constitution of Nepal,
2007 as follows:
1. Short Title and Commencement:
(1) This Act may be called the Domestic Violence (Crime and Punishment) Act, 2008
(2) This Act shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. Definitions: In this Act unless the context otherwise requires:
a) "Domestic Violence" means any form of physical, mental, sexual and economic abuse
perpetrated by any person to the other person with whom he has a family relationship. The
definition also covers acts of reprimand or emotional abuse.
b) "Domestic relationship" means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any
point of time, lived together in a shared household and are related by consanguinity, marriage,
adoption or are family members living together as a joint family; or a dependant domestic help
living in the same family.
c) "Physical abuse" means any act or conduct which is of such nature as to cause bodily harm or
injury except the losing and breaking of limbs; holding the person captive, inflicting physical
pain or any other act connected therewith and incidental thereto.
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
d) "Mental abuse" means any act of threatening the aggrieved person of physical torture, showing
terror, reprimanding him, accusing him of false deeds, forcefully evicting him from the house or
otherwise causing injury or harm to the aggrieved person emotionally and this phrase also
denotes discrimination carried out on the basis of thought, religion or culture and customs and
traditions.
e) "Sexual abuse" means any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades or
otherwise violates the dignity of any person; or any other act that hampers safe sexual relations.
f) "Economic abuse" includes deprivation of all or any property jointly or separately held by the
aggrieved person to which he/she is entitled to under the law; or deprivation of or access to
employment opportunities, economic resources or means.
g) "Aggrieved person" means any person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with the
defendant and who alleges to have been subjected to an act of domestic violence by the
perpetrator.
h) "Perpetrator" means the person having family relations with the aggrieved person who alleges
to have been subjected to an act of domestic violence by the defendant and this word also
indicates any person who is involved on some way in the act of domestic violence or in the
abetment of the crime.
i) "Police Office" means that Police Office closest to the residence of the aggrieved person, the
perpetrator or that office which is closest to the scene of crime and the word also indicates the
Women or Children Service Center under the District Police Office; or Police Post or Sub Police Post under the Police Office.
j) "Court" means any court that is mentioned and notified in the Gazette of Nepal.
k) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means as prescribed by the Rules made under this Act.
3. Domestic Violence shall not be committed, aided or abetted: (1) No body shall commit; or aid or
abet; or incite the commission of acts of domestic violence.
(2) Whoever commits an act contrary sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have committed an offence
under this Act.
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
4. File complaint or petition: (1) Any person who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence
has been, or is being, or is likely to be committed, may immediately lodge a written or oral complaint
with the Police Office, National Women's Commission or Local body.1
(2) In pursuance of sub-section (1), a complaint shall be registered immediately if received in a written
manner; and after writing down the factual details with the signature of the complainant, if received in
an oral manner.
(3) If the complaint is lodged in the National Women’s Commission, necessary action will be taken in
accordance with the relevant law that governs the National Women’s Commission.
(4) If the complaint is lodged in the Police Office, excluding the time of travel, the perpetrator shall be
produced in the Police Office within 24 hours of the lodging of the complaint for the recording of his
statement. If he refuses to appear, force may be applied for his arrest.
(5) If the complaint is lodged with the Local Body, excluding the time of travel, the perpetrator shall be
produced in the Local Body within 24 hours of the lodging of the complaint for the recording of his
statement. If he refuses to appear, force may be applied for his arrest.
(6) If the aggrieved person has been physically wounded or mentally tortured as a result of the act of
domestic violence, he shall be immediately sent to the nearest hospital or health post for necessary
check-up and an injury report shall be drawn up. If the medical report is prepared by the Local Body, a
copy of it shall be sent to the Police Station.
(7) While conducting preliminary investigation on the complaint lodged as per sub-section (1) of

section 4, if the situation so requires, the aggrieved person and his dependants shall be provided with
immediate protection with the help of the Police Office.
(8) Upon statements recorded as per sub-sections (4) or (5) of section 8, if there is reason to believe that
an act of domestic violence has been committed, and if the aggrieved person so desires, the police
1 Local Bodies consist of Ward Committees, Village Development Committees, District Development Committees. The local
body to be vested with powers under this Act shall be clarified in the Rules.
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
officer or local body officer, may, within 30 days from the date of registration of the complaint,
conduct reconciliation between the parties.
(9) While conducting reconciliation according to sub-section (8), as per necessity and availability,
assistance may be taken from a psychologist, sociologist, social activist and a family member trusted
by the aggrieved person; or any other witness. The psychological and social effects on the aggrieved
person, of such reconciliation as well as his/her right to confidentiality shall be borne in mind.
(10) The Police Officer or Local Body Officer shall, during the prosecution and/or arriving at a
decision upon the receipt of the complaint, ensure presence of the perpetrator on the due date of the
Court.
(11) If the perpetrator fails to present himself in accordance with sub-sections (4) and (5); or he cannot
be made present; or the parties fail to settle their dispute through reconciliation, the Police Officer and
Local body officer, with the consent of the complainant shall, after the expiry of 15 days as per subsection (8) and within 15 days thereafter, send the complaint mentioning all details, along with
evidence and other legal documents incidental thereto, to the Court.
(12) It shall be the duty of the Police Officer to provide assistance as per sub-sections (5) and (7).
5. Court shall take action: (1) Upon receipt of a complaint as per sub-section (11) of section 4. the
Court shall prosecute and decide the case as per this Act, on the basis of (the facts of) such complaint.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the aggrieved person may directly file his
complaint with the Court.
6. Power to grant interim protection order: (1) If the Court has reason to believe, on the basis of
preliminary investigation of the complaint, that the aggrieved person needs to be given immediate
protection, it may, till the time the final decision on the complaint is made, pass the following orders
against the perpetrator:
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
(a) To allow the aggrieved person to continue living in the shared household, to provide him/ her with
food, clothes, to not cause physical injury to him/ her and to behave with him/ her in a civilized and
dignified manner.
(b) To provide necessary treatment or to give money for the treatment of the aggrieved person if he/ she
has incurred physical or mental injury.
(c) To make necessary arrangements for the separate living of the perpetrator in the event that it's not
conducive for them to live together, and in such cases, make necessary arrangements for the
maintenance of the aggrieved person.
(d) To not insult, threaten or behave in an uncivilized manner; or aid and abet these acts
(e) To not harass the aggrieved person by entering his/ her place of separate residence; or in public
roads; or entering his/ her place of employment; or through the media or in any other manner.
(f) To carry out or arrange for getting carried out, necessary and relevant action for the protection and
welfare of the aggrieved person.
(2) On the basis of preliminary investigation upon the complaint, if the Court has reason to believe that
as per sub-section (1), the minor children of the aggrieved person or any other person dependant on
him, require protection, the Court shall issue, from within sub-section (1), any appropriate order.
7. Proceedings to be held in camera: (1) upon receipt of complaint to which this Act applies, all or any
proceedings and hearings shall be held in camera if the aggrieved person so desires.
(2) In accordance with sub-section (1), during the proceedings and hearings in camera, the claimant,
defendants, their respective legal practitioners and only others who have the permission of the Court,
shall be allowed to enter the court room.
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
8. Summary Court procedure to be followed: While conducting prosecution and deciding the case as
per this Act, the procedures prescribed in the Summary (Court) Procedures Act, 2028 (1971) shall be
followed.
9. Perpetrator to bear expenses of treatment: (1) If a person who has been subject to domestic violence
sustains physical or mental injuries so as to require medical help, the total costs of treatment in the
hospital shall be borne by the perpetrator.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the Court has reason to believe that the
perpetrator is an indigent person, it may order for the sanctioning of treatment expenses for the
aggrieved person, from the Service Center.
10. Compensation orders: The Court may, depending on the nature of the act of domestic violence, its
degree, the pain undergone by the aggrieved person, and also taking into account the economic and
social status of the perpetrator and aggrieved person, order the perpetrator to pay appropriate
compensation to the aggrieved person.
11. Service Centre: (1) For the immediate protection of the aggrieved person, and for the separate
shelter/ accommodation of the aggrieved person during the course of treatment, the Nepal Government,
according to the need, may establish Service Centers.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), any organization may, on gaining permission as prescribed,
establish and operate Service Centers.
(3) Service centers operating as per sub-section (2) shall be given financial and other aid from the
Treasury established under Section 12 of this Act.
(4) The service centre shall provide, as per necessity, legal aid, psycho-social service and economic aid
to the aggrieved person.
(5) The provisions of management, operation and monitoring of Service Centre shall be as prescribed.
12. Service Treasury: (1) Nepal Government shall, for the operation of Service Centers established as
per sub-section (1) of section 11, establish a Service Treasury.
(2) In the Treasury established as per sub-section (1), the following funds shall be kept:
(a) Fund received from the Nepal Government
Unofficial Translation by FWLD
Forum for Women, Law and Development (FWLD)
72, Adarsha Marg, Thapathali P.O. Box: 26538, Kathmandu (Nepal) Ph.No. 42664125, 4242683, Fax : 4240627 ,
Email. fwld@fwld.wlink.com.np Website :
(b)Fund received from any national or foreign organizations, institutions or individuals
(c) Fund received from any other source.
(3) The management and operation of the Service Fund shall be as prescribed.
13. Punishment: (1) Whoever commits the act of domestic violence shall be punished with a fine of
three thousand rupees which may extend up to twenty-five thousand rupees; or six months of
imprisonment; or both.
(2) Whoever attempts to commit domestic violence or abets the crime or incites others to commit the
crime shall be liable to half the punishment of that of the perpetrator.
(3) Whoever has been punished once for the offence of domestic violence shall be liable to double the
punishment upon every repetition of the offence.
(4) If a public servant commits the offence of domestic violence, he shall be liable to an additional ten
percent punishment over and above the prescribed punishment.
(5) Whoever doesn't obey the Court orders issued according to Section 6 shall be fined Two thousand
rupees to Fifteen thousand rupees; or four months of imprisonment; or both.
14. Limitation Period: The complaint, for an offence committed as per this Act, shall be filed within
ninety days of the commission of the crime.
15. Case may be filed as per existing law: Nothing in this Act shall prevent the investigation, trial and
decision in an offence which is punishable under this Act as well as an existing law for the time being
in force.
16. Shall be according to existing law: This Act shall apply to the provisions under the Act and in all
other cases, the existing law shall apply.
17. Right to make Rules: The Nepal Government may make such Rules as it may deem necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.

===== SOURCE: Prevention-of-Corruption_Act(2059).pdf =====

The Prevention of Corruption Act, 2059 (2002 A.D)
Date of Authentication and publication
3 Asadha, 2059 (June 17, 2002)
Act number 1 of the year 2059 (2002)
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make timely legal provisions relating
to prevention of corruption with a view to maintaining peace, convenience,
financial discipline, morality and good conduct among general public;
Be it enacted by Parliament in the first year of the reign of His Majesty's the King
Gyanendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.

Chapter - 1
Preliminary
Short Title, Extent and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called the
"Prevention of Corruption Act, 2059 (2002 A.D.)."
(2) It shall be extended throughout Nepal and applicable to all
Nepalese citizens, public servants residing anywhere outside Nepal and to
the non Nepalese citizens residing in foreign countries having committed
any act that may be deemed to be corruption under this Act.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
"Corruption" means offences punishable under Chapter -2.
"Graft" means cash, goods or any type of gain or benefit and the
term also includes bribe.
"Public institution" means the following institutions:-
A company, bank or a committee fully or partially owned
controlled
Government
N epal;
commission, organization, authority, corporation, academy,
board, center, council or any other corporate body of such
nature established by Government of Nepal;
A university, college, school, research center and any other
similar academ ic or e ducationa l institution run by
Go vernm ent of Nepa l or on the full or partial donation
from Government of Nepal;
Local bodies constituted under the Local Self-Governance Act,
1999;
An institution run on loan, grant or guarantee of
Government of Nepal;
An institution fully or partially owned or controlled by the
institution referred to in Sub-clauses (1), (2), (3) or (4) or
obtained grant from such institution; and
Any other institution prescribed as public institution by
Government of Nepal in a notification published by the
Nepal Gazette.
"Public Ser vant" means the person holding a public office
under the prevailing laws and the term also includes the following
persons:-
person appointed, nominated or elected under an oath to
Government of Nepal or to public institution, or under the
terms, contracts or agreements concluded with Government of
Nepal or with any public institution, or holding any office of
public responsibility for sa lary or a llowances or
remuneration or benefit or position with or without any type
of gain from Government of Nepal or any public institution;
A person appointed as an arbitrator or any other person
appointed in the same position pursuant to the prevailing
laws to resolve or adjudicate any dispute;
A person appointed, elected or nominated as liquidator,
surveyor or any other person working in the same capacity in
accordance with the prevailing laws;
A person designated as public servant by Government of
Nepal in a notification published in the Nepal Gazette.
"Re venue" means any type of tax, fee, charge, royalty, fine and other
amount of this type to be paid or given to Government of Nepal
or public institution, and the term also includes interest or fine to be
charged on such tax, fees, royalty and other amount of this type.
"Degree of offence" means the degree of offence to be determined on
the basis of circumstances and situation in which the offence has
been committed or attempted to be committed, the gravity of such
offence or the intention, qualification, position and capacity of
the person who has committed or attempted to commit any offence
punishable under this Act.
"Investigating Authority" means the body or official authorized to
conduct inquiry, investigation and to file cases relating to
corruption in accordance with the prevailing laws.

Chapter - 2
Provisions Relating to Offences of Corruption and Punishment
Punishment to Giver and Taker of Graft: (1) Whoever, being, or
expecting to become, a public servant accepts or agrees to accept graft
amounting as follows for him/herself or for any other person in
consideration of his/her performing or having performed or of
forbearing to perform or having forborne to perform any act pertaining to
his/her office or the related act or in consideration of favouring or
disfavouring or causing or not causing a loss or of having favoured or
disfavoured or having caused or not caused a loss to any person while
carrying out his/her official functions, shall be liable to a punishment of
imprisonment as follows and of a fine as per the amount involved depending
on the degree of the offence. In case the graft has already been accepted, it
shall be confiscated.
Up to twenty five thousand rupees.
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three months.
More than twenty five thousand
Imprisonment for a term from
rupees to fifty thousand rupees.
three to four months.
More than fifty thousand rupees to
Imprisonment for a term from four
one hundred thousand rupees.
to six months.
More than one hundred thousand
Imprisonment for a term from six
rupees to five hundred thousand
months to one year and six months.
rupees.
More than five hundred thousand
Imprisonment for a term from one
rupees to one million rupees.
year and six months to two years
and six months.
More than one million rupees to two
Imprisonment for a term from two
million and five hundred thousand
years and six months.
rupees.
More than two million and five
Imprisonment for a term from four
hundred thousand rupees to five
to six years.
million rupees.
More than five million rupees to ten
Imprisonment for a term from six
million rupees.
to eight years.
Whatsoever amount above ten
Imprisonment for a term from
million rupees.
eight to ten years.
Whoever, other than a public servant, accepts or agrees to
accept graft amounting as follows for him/herself or for any other person
with the intention of convincing any public servant to perform or forbear
to perform any function under his/her office or position or for convincing
to perform or forbear to perform any such act or with the intention of
favoring or disfavoring any person or causing or not causing any loss or
for convincing to perform or forbear to perform any such act while
carrying out any function under his office or position, shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment as follows and of a fine as per the amount involved
depending on the degree of the offence. In case the graft has already been
accepted, it shall be confiscated.
(3) Whoever gives a graft to a public servant or any other person in order
to do or forbear to do any function pursuant to Sub-Section (1) or (2),
shall be liable to a punishment pursuant to Sub-Section (1) depending on the
degree of the offense committed.
(4) Whoever abates to commit an offence punishable under this Section
shall, if he/she is a public servant, be liable to a punishment as same as the
punishment prescribed for the same offence, and if he/she is any other person, shall
be liable to half of the punishment for that offence on the basis of the degree of the
offence irrespective of whether or not the offence has been committed because of
such abetment.
Punishment to Public Servants Accepting Goods or Service Free of Cost
or at Lower Prices: Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or agrees or
attempts to accept, without a prior approval of Government of Nepal or public
institution, any goods or service free of cost or at lower prices for him/herself or
for any other person, from any individual, having knowledge that such individual
is related to or is likely to be related to any act related to his/her office or any act
carried out or to be carried out by him/herself is related to any function of his
office, shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from six months
to one year depending on the degree of the offence and a fine equal to the
amount involved and in case such goods is already accepted, it shall be confiscated
and in case of the service, the price thereof shall be fixed and a fine equal to the
price of such service shall be imposed.
Punishment for Taking Gift, Present, Award or Donation: (1) Whoever,
being a public servant, accepts, without a prior approval Government of
Nepal or a public institution, any type of donation, gifts, presents, awards or any
type of benefit him/herself or through any member of his/her family or other
person, so as to causing an impact in any way on any of his/her works which is
supposed to be carried out by him/her according to the office he/she assumes;
or any public servant who borrows from a person related to a work which he/she
has to carry out according to the office he assumes, shall be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment from three to six months depending on the degree of the offence
and the amount shall be confiscated.
(2) Whoever, being a public servant, has received any present or gift in
exchange of a gift or present brought from the amount of a fund
belonging to Government of Nepal or a public institution, such gift or present
shall be immediately submitted to his/her office. If not submitted, it shall be
deemed to have committed the offence referred to in Sub-section (1) and such gift
or present shall be confiscated having him/her punished accordingly.
Punishment for Taking Commission: In case any type of commission,
remuneration, brokerage fee, benefit or advantage is liable to be paid while
performing duties by a public servant or while purchasing or hiring or taking or
giving on a lease any commodity or service necessary for Government of
Nepal or a public institution or while awarding or accepting a contract by
Government of Nepal or a public institution or while selling or hiring or
taking or giving on a lease any commodity or service produced by Government
of Nepal or a public institution, such commission, remuneration, brokerage fee,
benefit or advantage shall be submitted to the concerned office within seven
days from the date of receipt. In case not submitted as such, such public servant
shall be deemed to have committed the offence referred to in Section 3 and the
amount shall be confiscated having him/her punished accordingly.
Punishment to Public Servants for Leaking Revenue: Whoever, being a
public servant under the duty of collecting revenues, causes revenue leakage or
help or abets any person for its leakage having been involved him/herself in
any of the following manners, shall be deemed to have committed the offence
referred to in Section 3 with regard to the amount of revenue so leaked and
he/she shall be liable to the same punishment of imprisonment, and double of
the amount of revenue leaked shall be fined: -
To assist any person in the act of leaking revenue in any manner
whatsoever, having accepted any cash or kind, fee, prize or donation
or any type of other benefit or forbear to collect revenue or to assist or
cause to assist to collect less revenue having caused loss to Government
of Nepal or a public institution by taking or not taking any type of gain
from any person;
To assess or assist to assess less revenue or to assess revenue to
the effect of not charging revenue at all by not going through the
documents or not investigating such documents or by not collecting
necessary evidence while assessing revenue as required by the
existing law;
To embezzle the revenue collected by not depositing it in
accordance with the prevailing laws;
To release or assist to release goods, by making difference in the
invoice, quality or quantity of such goods, and w ithout collecting
the prescribed re venue while assessing the revenue or carrying out
valuation of such goods.
Punishment to Public Servants for Getting Illegal Benefit or Causing
Illegal Loss with Mala fide Intention: (1) Whoever, being a public servant,
commits any of the following acts with the mala fide intention of getting
illegal benefits for him/herself or for any other person, or of causing loss to
Government of Nepal or public institution, shall be liable to an
imprisonment of a term from three months to three years depending on
the degree of offence, and in case the amount involving the offence is
known, such amount shall be confiscated having him/her fined
accordingly. In case such amount is not know n, an imprisonment for
a term from three months to three years and a fine from ten thousand to
fifty thousand rupees shall be imposed.
To show more costs or works in an unnatural manner
without any ground of justification while conducting physibility
study of, or setting norms for, a project.
To use or allow to use the construction materials of lower
quality than that of the prescribed quality, or to certify or
to approve the use of such materials as the materials of
prescribed quality;
To degrade the quality of construction work or to change the
form or shape thereof or to carry out or cause to carry out
construction works in contravention of the prescribed
terms, conditions and standard; or to certify or to
approve such construction work as qualitative and under
the prescribed terms and conditions without any reasonable
ground;
To carry out or cause to carry out construction works having
increased or amended the costs estimate in an unnatural manner
and without any reasonable ground;
To give or receive payment having prepared false bills or
receipts or to give or receive double payment of bills;
To procure or cause to procure excessive quantity of goods in
an unnatural manner than the quantity needed without reasonable
grounds;
To carry out or cause to carry out unnatural valuation of a
government property, a property of a public organization or of
public property;
To register, occupy or use or to cause to register, occupy or use
a government or public property in one's own name or in the
name of other in an illegal manner;
To value or cause to value a collateral security to be
mortgaged in the name of a governmental or public
organization in an excessive and unreasonable prices than the
real prices;
To procure or cause to procure goods of degrading quality,
date expired and to procure or cause to procure goods
having paid higher prices in an unnatural manner.
(2) In case any public servant does not return a vehicle or a facility
available to him/her by virtue of his/her official position within the
prescribed time after the expiry of the official position without any
reasonable ground, he/she shall be liable to a fine from one thousand to
five thousand rupees depending on the degree of the offense and such
vehicle or facility shall be taken back.
(3) Whoever, being a public servant, causes any type of loss to a
governmental or public property with mala fide intention having
committed any act excluding the acts referred to in Sub-Section (1) and (2),
shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment not exceeding two years or of
a fine equal to the amount of the loss or both depending on the degree of
the offence.
In case any person other than a public servant, w ith mala
fide intention of making illegal gain to him/herself or to any other
person, does not abide by the terms and conditions of an oath,
undertaking, agreement, contract, license, permit, promissory note or
dealership entered into with Government of Nepal or a public institution or
carries out business or misuses the facilities or powers of governmental or
such institution violating the Rules or Procedures determined by or terms
and conditions accepted by Government of Nepal or such institution in a
manner prohibited by the prevailing law, he/she shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment not exceeding two years and be fined
according to the amount of loss and the amount of loss shall be confiscated.
Punishment to Public Servants Preparing False Documents: Whoever,
being a public servant under the duty of preparing documents, prepares
false documents with mala fide intention of causing loss to Government of
Nepal or Government or public institution, shall be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment for a term from three months to one year, and a fine from ten
thousand to fifty thousand rupees.
Punishment for Translating False Documents: Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person authorized or designated to translate
documents,
wrongly
translates
documents,
translates
documents
incorporating therein false particulars or makes difference in the name,
surname, date, facts or other particulars with the mala fide intention of
causing loss to Government of Nepal, a Government or public institution;
or with the intention of getting illegal benefit to him/herself or to any other
person, shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from
three months to one year and of a fine from ten thousand to fifty thousand
rupees, depending on the degree of offence committed.
Punishment for Tempering Government Documents: Whoever, either a
public servant or any other person, corrects, adds, or changes in
documents belonging to a government or public institution without
authority or in an illegal manner, shall be liable to a punishment of
imprisonment for a term from three months to two years and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousands rupees.
Punishment for Causing Damage to Government or Public Documents:
Whoever, being a public servant, conceals a document belonging to
government or to a public institution or causes damage to, or destroys,
such document, shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment
from six month to one year and shall be fined from ten thousand to
fifty thousand rupees. In case any loss is incurred due to such
concealment, damage or destruction, the loss shall also be recovered.
Punishment for Disclosing Secrecy of Question Papers or Altering the
Result of Examination: Save in cases where the authorized person
discloses or causes to disclose question papers of an examination to be
conducted by a government body or a public institution before the
prescribed time ha ving given reasons of special circumstances,
whoever, being a public servant, discloses or causes to disclose the secrecy
of such question paper in any manner whatsoever, or alters or causes to
alter the results of examinations with the intention of making illegal
advantage to him/herself or any other person, shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment from three months to one year and shall be
fined from five thousand to ten thousand rupees.
Punishment to Public Servants Engaging in Illegal Trade or Business:
Whoever, being a public servant, engages in trade or business in his/her
own name or in the name of other person or in partnership with others,
takes part in auction or bidding, or becomes a partner in any firm or
company or a cooperative organization while being prohibited by law, shall
be liable a punishment of imprisonment for a term from three months to
six months and a fine from ten thousand to fifty thousand rupees, and the
property earned in such a manner shall be confiscated.
Provided that, this section shall not be deemed to have hindered to
subscribe shares of a public limited company called for public subscription.
Punishment for Claiming False Designation: Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person falsely claims that he/she holds any position,
power, capacity or facility or enjoys such position, power, capacity or facility
of a public servant which he/she is not entitled to or displays any symbol, dress
or mark relating to a position of a public servant or wears or displays any
object resembling to such symbol, dress or mark with the intention of
leading others to falsely believe that these are the official symbols, dresses
or marks of a public servant, shall be liable to a punishment of
imprisonment for a term from one year to two years and with a fine from
fifty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees, depending on the degree
of the offence committed.
Punishment for Giving False Particulars: (1) Whoever, with the
intention of securing a position of a public servant, or of being continue
in such a position, or of securing any position or of getting any benefit or
facility, gives false particulars regarding his educational qualifications,
name, names of the father and grandfather, age, caste, surname, address,
nationality or qualification, or gives false description in any other matters,
or submits false certificate relating thereto, shall be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment for a term from six months to one year and of a fine from
ten thousand to twenty thousand rupees, depending on the degree of the
offense committed.
Whoever, being a public servant under the duty of giving
statement of his/her property under this Act or any other prevailing
laws, gives false statement either having increased or having concealed
the actual property belonging to or registered in his/her name or under
his/her share entitlement or belonging to his/her joint family, shall be liable
to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from one month to three
months and the fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees. The property,
which has been concealed in such a manner, shall also be confiscated.
Punishment for Damaging Public Property: Whoever, being a public
ser vant, misappropriates, causes loss to or abuses or causes others to do
so, or destroys or uses for personal purposes, while performing his/her
duties pertaining to his/her office, shall be liable to be punished pursuant
to Section 3 and the property which has been misappropriated, damaged,
misused or destroyed or caused others to do so, shall be recovered from him/her.
Punishment for Exerting Illegal Pressures: Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person, compels any public servant or any other
person to commit any offence punishable urder this Act by exercise of
fear or threat of under, kidnapping, taking away of property, of causing
adverse impact on prestige or by exerting any other type of illegal pressure,
shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from four to
eight years and a fine from one hundred thousand to five hundred thousand
rupees.
Punishment for Giving False Report: (1) Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person authorized to carry out auditing in a
government body or in a public institution, prepares auditing report
with mala fide intention having shown the facts not done or happened
in the transaction or having concealed the facts done or happened, shall be
liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from three months to
one year and to a fine from ten thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees
depending on the degree of the offence committed.
Save as provided in Sub-section (1), in case any public
servant or any other person under the duty of submitting report having
conducted a study or investigation on any subject in connection with
functions of government body or public institution, prepares report with
mala fide intention having shown the facts actually not done or
happened or having concealed the facts actually done or happened, such
persons shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from
three months to one year and to the fine from ten thousand rupees to
fifty thousand rupees depending on the degree of the offence
committed.
Property Deemed to be Acquired Illegally: (1) In case the statement of
property submitted in accordance with prevailing laws by a public servant
deemed to have held a public office in accordance with prevailing laws
seems to be incompatible or unnatural or in case he/she maintains an
incompatible or unsuitable lifestyle or it is proved that he/she has given
someone a donation, gift, grant, present or has lent money beyond
his/her capacity, he/she shall prove the sources from which he/she has
acquired such property and if he fails to do so, such property shall be
deemed to have been acquired in an illegal manner.
In case it has been proved that a public servant has acquired property
in an illegal manner as referred to in Sub-section (1), he/she shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years as per the
amount of the property acquired in such a manner, and a fine according to the
amount of property and the illegal property acquired in such a manner shall also
be confiscated.
Punishment for Committing Attempts: Except otherwise provided for in
this chapter, whoever attempts to commit an offense punishable under this Act
shall be liable to half of the punishment to be imposed on the public servant or
any other person committing such offences.
Punishment to Accomplices: Except otherwise provided elsewhere in this
Act, the accomplices to any offense punishable under this Act shall be liable to
half of the punishment to be imposed on the public servant or any other person
committing such offences.
Provided that, the accomplice who has given cash or kind or made
available any other type of benefit to the public servant or any other person
committing an offence or who has taken such benefit shall be liable to the
punishment as equal to the person committing the offence.
Principal to be Deemed to have Committed the Offence in case a
Corporate Body Commits Offence: In case any firm, company or corporate
body commits any act that is deemed to be an offence under this chapter, the
partners at the time of commission of the act in case of a firm and the person
acting as the principal official in case of a company or a corporate body shall be
deemed to have committed the offence.
Provided that, in case it is proved that such act has been committed prior to
the appointment of the person acting as the principal official, the person who has
committed the act shall be deemed to have committed the offence.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the "the person acting as the
principal official" means the Chairman, Board Member, General Manager,
Managing Director or the Official of a company or corporate body working in
the same capacity.
Additional Punishment: In case the offences under this chapter have been
committed by an office bearer of a constitutional organ or body to be nominated or
appointed by officer belonging to the special class of Government of Nepal or
officers of equivalent rank; Head, General Manager or officer of a public
institution of equivalent rank, such person shall be liable to the punishment of
imprisonment for a term of three years in addition to the punishment prescribed for
such offence.

Chapter - 3
Investigations, Inquiries and Filling of Cases of Corruption
Investigations and Inquiries: (1) In case the investigating authority comes to
know, through any information, source or a complaint lodged by any person, that
any person has committed or is going to commit corruption, it shall initiate
necessary investigations, inquiries and other actions in this regard.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (1),
in case the investigating authority has received information from any source that
any person has committed or is going to commit corruption, such authority
may take immediate actions including raid, seizure of documents or goods and
materials or arrest of person.
Preliminary Inquiry: The investigating authority shall, upon having received
a complaint or information that one has committed or is going to commit an
offence under this Act, initiate preliminary inquiry confidentially as may be
necessary.
Seeking Explanation: While conducting preliminary inquiry pursuant to

Section 26, in case the investigating authority is of the view that the
information received is based on facts, it may, having provided particulars
relating thereto, seek for comment or explanation from the concerned body or
person as may be necessary.
Powers of Investigating Authority: (1) The investigating authority may, while
conducting investigations and inquiries into offenses of corruption under this
Chapter, exercise the following powers: -
To order a government body, public institution, public servant
or any other person to send or submit within a certain time
any relevant document, documentary evidences or any other
things before it;
To conduct inquiry with, or to record the statement of, the
public servant or any other person accused of corruption or
the person to whom the investigating authority deems to
having information on the relevant facts;
The investigating authority may, upon having taken
explanation from or upon completing inquiry or recording
the statement of a public servant or any other person accused
of corruption, release such person having executed a bond
from him/her to appear as and when required, or having
required him/her to appear on the prescribed date or, in case
there is a reasonable cause to believe that such public
servant or person may abscond or there has been a loss of
an amount, the investigating authority may ask from
him/her to submit a deposit or guarantee and require
him/her to appear in the prescribed date or in case no
deposit or guarantee is produced, keep him/her in custody.
In case the investigating authority has sent a letter having
fixed a time limit to the concerned body, public servant or other person
requiring to submit any document or any other material or to provide
information on any matter or requiring a public servant or any other
person to appear before it, it shall be done accordingly and in case not done,
it shall be as follows:-
In case the concerned government body or public institution
does not submit such document or material or does not
provide information w ithin the time prescribed, the
investigating authority may send a letter to the concerned
government body or a public institution to take departmental
action against the chief officer of the concerned government
body or a public institution and in case such a letter is
received, the concerned government body or a public
institution shall take actions immediately.
In case the concerned public servant or any other person does
not submit the document or material or does not provide
information or does not appear within the prescribed
period, the investigating authority may impose a fine not
exceeding one thousand rupees on such person.
In case any government body, public institution, public
servant or any other person does not do as required to do in
writing by the investigating authority even after the
departmental action or imposition of a fine pursuant to Clauses
(a) or (b), the investigating authority may issue arrest
warrant to get the chief officer of such body or institute or
such public servant or other person appeared and get such
document or material produced or acquired necessary
information from him/her. In case the chief officer of a body
or institution, public servant or any other person so arrested
does not submit such document or material or does not give
information relating thereto, the investigating authority
may order for keeping him/her in custody for a period of up to
seven days.
After the investigating authority's order for departmental
action or payment of the fine pursuant to Sub-section (2), in case the chief
officer of the concerned body or the concerned public servant or any other
person submits an application along with reasonable causes for being
unable to do as required, and if the causes are satisfactory, such order or
order of fine may be cancelled.
The investigating authority may conduct or cause to
conduct a search at any place and seize any necessary materials or
document or Photostat copy thereof while conducting the search. A
receipt of the material or document so seized shall be given to the
concerned person.
Appointment or Designation of Investigation Officer: The investigation
authority may, in order to conduct investigation and inquiries into the
offences punishable under this Act, appoint or designate any officer under
it or any government officer or any officer of a public institution as the
investigation officer.
Provided that, while appointing or designating any government
officer, or officer of a public institution as the investigating officer,
consultation shall be held with Government of Nepal or with the Chief
Officer of the concerned body, depending on circumstances.
Functions, Duties and Powers of the Investigation Officer: (1) Functions,
duties and powers of the investigation officer shall be as follows:-
To arrest the offender immediately and to take necessary actions;
To conduct or cause to conduct search at any office, house,
building, godown, vehicle or any other places while
conducting investigation and inquiries or while collecting
evidence into offences punishable under this Act;
To exercise other powers conferred on the investigation officer.
While conducting investigation and inquiries into offences
punishable under this Act, the investigation officer shall have all such
powers, duties, facilities and obligation as the police is having under the
prevailing laws in respect to recording statements of the accused persons,
and preparing reports of public inquiries.
While carrying out functions under Sub-section (2), the
investigation officer may exercise the powers equivalent to the powers of a
court to require the accused to appear on prescribed date or to release
him/her on deposit or on guarantee or detain him/her in case he is unable
to furnish such deposit or guarantee as may be necessary.
31. Keeping Accused in Custody: (1) The investigation officer may, in case
there is sufficient ground that any person having been taken action for an
offence under this Act may lose or destroy any evidence or cause
hindrance in the process of investigation or inquiries or cause adverse
impact thereon, keep him/her in custody having given him an order of
detention in accordance with the prevailing laws.
In case the investigation or inquiries with regard to a person is
not completed within twenty four hours and it appears that the
investigation needs to be continued having him/her detained, the
investigation officer shall detain him/her after having him/her presented
before the authority hearing the case and only after getting approval
therefor from the authority hearing the case. While seeking for approval
with the authority hearing the case, the charges against the person
detained, its bases, the reason for continuing investigation having him/her
detained and if his/her statement has been recorded, the contents of such
statement shall be clearly stated.
The person who has been presented before the authority
hearing the case for approval of detention pursuant to Sub-section (2)
may submit an application while being presented there requesting for his/her
physical checkup.
In case a permission for detention is sought pursuant to Subsection (2), the authority hearing the case may, having considered whether
or not the investigation has been carried out in a satisfactory manner and
if it is found that the investigation is being carried out satisfactorily, give
approval for detention for a maximum period of six months not
exceeding thirty days at a time or time and again.
While seeking for a permission for extension of time duration
of detention pursuant to Sub-section (4), the person under the custody
may, if he/she so wants, submit an application to the authority hearing the
case mentioning the reason or basis for his/her not being in detention any
longer.
32. Cooperation of Other Bodies May be Required: (1) The investigating
authority may, in course of investigations and inquiries into offenses
punishable under this Act, ask any government body or public institution
or any person for cooperation as may be necessary and it shall be the duty of
such body, institution or person to cooperate as and when required.
The investigating authority may, in course of conducting
investigation and inquiries into offenses of corruption under this Act,
take the help of police force as well. While engaging police personnel in
the work, the order issued by the investigating authority shall, with regard
to the police, be equivalent to the order of the concerned Inspector General
of Police.
The investigation officer may ask the police officer or
police personnel subordinate to him/her for help. It shall be the duty of the
concerned police officer or personnel to assist him/her in case the investigation
officer requires such assistance.
In case the investigating authority deems it fit that because of
the very nature of the offence under investigation and inquiry, it is
necessary to consult an expert engaged in any agency to be involved in such
investigation and inquiry; the investigating authority may ask the
concerned body to make such expert available on a temporary
assignment for a specific period of time, and in case such a demand is
made, such body shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing
laws, make available the concerned expert.
Automatic Suspension: In case any public servant is detained pursuant to
Clause (c) of Subsection (1) of Section 28, Sub-section (3) of Section 30
and Section 31, he shall ipso facto be suspended until the period of
detention and if a case is filed against him/her pursuant to Section 36,
he/she shall ipso facto be suspended unless and until the proceedings of the case is
over.
34. Accepting Services: ( 1) T he in ve stigating a uthor ity m ay, w hile
c onducting investigation, inquiries and taking any other actions
relating thereto, require services of experts of the concerned subject or of
specialized agencies.
The investigating authority shall, in order to get the services
referred to in sub-section (1), appoint the concerned expert or specialized
agency and while appointing as such, the investigating authority shall
have to enter into an agreement having stated the functions to be carried
out by such expert or specialized agency, the powers that may be
exercised, the terms and conditions to be fulfilled, the procedures and
remuneration and other benefits which such expert or specialized agency is
entitled to.
In case the investigating authority is in need of the service of
employees of
Government of Nepal or of a specialized agency,
notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing law s, such
employees shall be deputed for a period required by the investigating
authority.
35. Keeping in Postponement: While inquiring and investing under this Act,
in case it appears that the alleged offense could not be proved on the
basis of the collected evidence, the investigating authority may keep the
complaint in postponement issuing an order slip along with reasons
thereof and in case of decision of postponement, the information thereof
shall be given to the accused person and the complainant.
Provided that, nothing in this section shall be deemed to have
pre vented to investigate and re-inquire on such complaint if any new evidence
is found later on.
Filing of cases: In connection with an accusation of commission of
corruption, in case there is a reasonable cause to believe that the accused has
committed the said offence, the investigating authority shall file a case
before the authority having powers to hear the case under the prevailing
laws.

Chapter - 4
Provisions Relating to Prevention of Corruption
37. National Vigilance Center: (1) Government of Nepal may establish a
National Vigilance Center under the direct control and supervision of the
Prime Minister in order to effectively control corruption-oriented acts and to
promote people's awareness against corruption.
(2) Government of Nepal may designate a special class officer of
the civil service as the chief of the Center referred to in Sub-section (1), and
there shall be other officials of the services of Government of Nepal in the
center as may be necessary.
38. Functions, Duties and Powers of the National Vigilance Center: The
National Vigilance Center established under Sub-Section (1) of Section 37
shall have following functions, duties and powers:-
To collect information on whether or not the functions to be
carried out by the Ministries, Departments, offices of Government
of Nepal and public institution are being regularly carried out;
To alert Ministries, Departments, Offices of Government of Nepal,
or public institution in case the functions to be carried out by them
are not found to have been carried out;
To monitor the statement of property and income given by persons
holding a public post as per the prevailing laws;
To make necessary provision for regular surveillance, surprise
check and investigation in corruption prone places or works;
To make necessary recommendations to Government of Nepal with
regard to the policies, strategies and reformation on laws to be adopted for
corruption control;
To make provision of a complaint box in the Ministries of Government of
Nepal, Departments, Offices or public institution;
To provide any suggestion or direction to the concerned bodies with
collect
necessary
description
information
concerning
corruption from the body or authority working for investigation into
offences of corruption and to maintain them updated;
To forward any information concerning corruption received to it to
the concerned bodies;
To carry out or cause to carry out other incidental functions with
regard to corruption control;
To carry out or cause to carry out other functions prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.

Chapter - 5
Miscellaneous
Statement May be Taken or Transaction or Account May be Freeze: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the existing law, if it appears from any
source during the course of investigation into offences of corruption that there has
been financial transaction or operation of an account in the name of any person
with any bank or financial institution within the country or in any foreign
country, the investigating authority may order to freeze such transaction or
account. The concerned bank or financial institute shall freeze such transaction or
account in accordance with the order of the investigating authority.
Provided that in case such transaction or account to be freeze is with
a bank or financial institution in a foreign country, the investigation authority
may cause to freeze the operation of transaction or account through the diplomatic
channel.
(2) The investigating authority may impose a fine of fifty thousand rupees
in maximum to the chief of the concerned bank or financial institution located
in Nepal not freezing transactions or accounts pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The investigation authority may, if it deems fit in the course of
investigation, according to the need, ask for the statement of property
belonging to persons holding an office of public responsibility or freeze such
property.
Banning to Issue or Freezing Passport: Notwithstanding anything
contained in the prevailing laws, the investigating authority may, on the basis
of the gravity of the offence, the condition, circumstances in which the accused
committed the offence, degree of the offence and the punishment in case of
conviction of the offence, issue an order to the concerned bodies for not
issuing passport to any accused or for withholding it if it has been already
issued.
Restriction to Leave Places: In case an action has been taken against any
person under this Act, the investigating authority may, on the basis of the
gravity of the offence, the condition and circumstances in which the accused
committed the offence, the degree of the offence and the punishment in case of
conviction of the offence, issue an order to any accused not to leave any place or
not to go any particular place without the approval of the investigating
authority.
Provision Relating to Service of Summons: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the existing law, while servicing summon in the name of
a foreigner in any offence under this Act, the summon may be served to the
office or representative of such person within of Nepal, if any, and service of
summon in that manner shall be deemed to have duly made.
In case there is no office or representative referred to in sub-Section
(1), the summon shall be served to the main place of transaction, or to the address
of such person where he resides permanently, or to the address of correspondence
given by such person in connection with his business transaction through the
means of telex, fax or any other means of telecommunication in written
form or through registered post, and the summons served in any of such
manners shall be deemed to have been duly made.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sections (1) or (2),
this Section shall not be deemed to have hindered the service of summons
according to the provisions of a treaty in case there is a separate provision for
service of summons in the name of persons living in a foreign country in any
treaty to which Government of Nepal or of Nepal is a party.
Publication of Notice: Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing
laws, in case it has been reported that no notice could be served while sending a
notice or servicing a summon in the name of any person in accordance with
this Act or other prevailing laws for not finding the address of such
person or for any other reasons, a public notice shall be published least
for twice in a national level newspaper (in case of a foreigner in a
English Daily) having given him/her a time limit of 30 days and having
given short description as to whether the investigation is underway or the
case is already filed at the authority hearing the case; and in case a notice
has been published in such a way, the notice shall be or summon deemed
to have been duly delivered or served to such person notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws.
Obligations of government bodies and public institutions: The chief
of a government body and public institution shall, in case any
information has been received that corruption has been committed at his
office or any other office under him, immediately take the related
documents or file under his custody and keep it safe, and upon having
inquired with the persons and officials related to such subject and upon
having known the reality, if there appears any reason of commission of
corruption, he shall forward such documents to the concerned body for
investigation and inquiry.
Case May be Filed against Retired Person: Nothing in this Act shall
be deemed to have prevented filling of a case against a retired public
servant in connection with commission of corruption ha ving embezzled
or causing loss to government or public property or the property
belonging to an organization owned by Government of Nepal even after
such public servant is retired from the service.
No Hindrance to Initiate Proceedings and Finalize Case:
Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevailing laws, there shall
be no hindrance to initiate proceedings and finalize a case even if the
accused or defendant dies before or after a case under this Act is filed.
Confiscation of Property: In case it is proved that any person has
earned property having committed any act which is deemed to have
committed corruption under this Act or other prevailing laws and has
kept such property and the property accrued therefrom in his/her own
name or in the name of anybody else such property shall be confiscated.
Provided that, in case the ownership of such property is transferred to
any person and in case the price of such a property is quoted, the
transaction involving such amount shall be treated as a simple loan deed.
Order to Freeze Property of a Foreigner: (1) In case any foreigner
who does not appear before the investigating authority in pursuance of a
notice sent by the investigating authority or summon served pursuant to

Section 42 is having any property, entitlement, interest or concern
within of Nepal, the investigating authority may order to maintain a
status quo with regard to them or not to allow to take such property,
entitlement, interest or concern outside of Nepal unless and until such
a person appears before the investigating authority, and it shall be the duty
of all concerned to abide by such an order.
(2) The investigating authority may impose a fine of one
thousand rupees in maximum to the person who does not abide by the
order made pursuant to Subsection (1) and in case any type of loss or
damage is caused to Government of Nepal or a public institution because
of non-observance of such an order, such loss shall also be recovered from
him/her.
Punishment for Filing False Complaint: In case it is found that any
person has filed a false complaint against any public servant or person
without having any reasonable ground for filing a complaint and with the
intention of causing any type of loss, damage or harassment, the
investigating authority may impose a fine not exceeding five thousand
rupees on him.
Provision Relating to Statement of Property: (1) Whoever joins a
public office shall, within sixty days from the date of joining the public
office, and whoever is engaged in a public office on the date of
commencement of this Section shall, within sixty days from the date
of commencement of this Act, and thereafter within sixty days from the
date of completion of each fiscal year, submit the up dated statement of
property in his/her name or in the name of his/her family members along
with the sources or evidence thereof to the body or authority
prescribed by Government of Nepal having published a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
In case the person assuming a public office who is unable to
submit the statement of property within the time limit referred to in Subsection (1) makes a request for extension of the time limit having stated
therein the reasons for his/her not being able to submit such statement, the
concerned body or authority may extend the time limit for a period of
thirty days in maximum.
The person assuming a public office who does not submit the
statement of property within the time limit extended pursuant to Subsection (2) shall be liable to a fine of five thousand rupees and the
concerned body or official may investigate having suspected that there is
illegal property in his/her and his/her family member's names.
The statement of property submitted under this section Shall
be confidential.
Provided that, if statement of property is required in connection with
investigation and inquiries under this Act, such statement may be made
available to the concerned authority.
51. Punishment to Persons Causing Hindrance and Obstruction: The
authority hearing the case may, on the basis of the report of investigating
authority, impose a punishment of imprisonment of a term of six months in
maximum or a fine up to five thousand rupees in maximum or both to a person
who causes hindrance or obstruction in actions relating to investigation and
inquiries under this Act.
52. Confidentiality of Information: (1) No notice, information or evidence
received to, collected by, the investigating authority in connection with
investigation and inquiry in an offence of corruption shall be publicly notified
before filing of case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), the
investigating
authority
publicize
particulars
inquiry
investigation of any matter of public importance which it deems fit as may be
necessary.
53. Departmental Action to Employees Involved in Inquiries and
Investigation: In connection with implementation of this Act, in case it is
proved that the investigation officer or other employee engaged in investigation
and inquiries has committed any act knowingly with the intention of causing
harassment to any person, departmental action shall be taken against such
employees.
54. To be subjected to Imprisonment: Notwithstanding anything contained
in the prevailing laws, the person having been punished by a court with a
term of imprisonment shall be subjected only to imprisonment.
55. Remission in the Claim of Punishment: The investigating authority may
give complete or partial remission in the claim of punishment with regard to
the accused who assists in the process of investigation carried out under this
Act having him/herself presented as a witness on its behalf.
Provided that in case other evidences do not prove his assistance or in case
he becomes hostile later on, the case may be filed against him again
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in other prevailing laws.
56. No Action to be Taken: Notwithstanding anything contained in the
prevailing laws, no action shall be taken against a public servant for
disclosing confidentiality under the law relating to the terms and condition of
his/her service who gives information for taking legal action in case of corruption
committed or going to be committed or for preventing to be committed.
57. Delegation of Power: (1) The investigating authority may, by publication
of a notification in the Nepal Gazette, delegate its all or any power conferred on
it by this Act to any of the Government of Nepal's gazetted level officers.
While delegating power pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
territorial jurisdiction for the powers to be accountable by such officer
shall be as prescribed in such notification.
The officer exercising the power conferred on him under sub Section (1) shall, for that purpose, be responsible to the investigating authority.
58. Provision Relating to Rewards: The investigating authority may give an
appropriate reward to the person assisting it in connection with inquires,
investigation or collection of evidences in the offences punishable under this Act.
Special Provisions Relating to Cases of Corruption: Notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws, it shall be as follows in the
following matters with regard to the cases filed under this Act:-
In case any public servant or any other person has, while committing or in
connection with committing an act that is deemed to be an offence under
other prevailing laws, there shall be no hindrance to file separate case in
accordance with other prevailing laws.
In case there has been adverse impact caused on the rights, property or
interests of any person while committing or in connection with committing
an act that is deemed to be an offence under this Act by a public servant or
any other person, there shall be no hindrance for such person to file a
separate case.
In cases where a case has been filed against a person for an offence
under this Act and it appears later on, after having examined the
evidence, that the case must be filed against other person as well, there
shall be no hindrance to file a separate charge sheet against such person.
Nothing shall be deemed to prevent filling of a separate case against
any public servant or person for offenses to be liable under this Act, even
if the separate case has been already filed against such person in order to
recover loss and damages made by such person to Government of Nepal
or public institution illegally;
In case, where a case has been filed under this Act against any public
servant or other person, there shall be no hindrance to file a case under this
Act or the case filed shall not be dismissed merely for the reason that
there is a legal provision of recovery of the loss caused to Government of
Nepal or a public institution from such public servant or other person.
No cases filed under this Act shall be withdrawn or compromised.
60. Informer and his/her details to be kept confidential: The name or
address of an informer providing information that an offence under this Act
has been committed or going to be committed shall be kept confidential in case
he/she so requests.
Unclaimed goods to be entitled to Government of Nepal: (1) In case
no owner of the goods related to the offence punishable under this Act is traced,
the investigating authority shall publish a public notice requiring the claimant, if
any, of the goods so seized to claim the goods, within a time limit of thirty five
days.
(2) In case, no claim is made within the time limit referred to in subsection (1) or even if the claim is made but in absence of proof the claim is not
tenable, such goods shall be the property of Government of Nepal having treated
such goods as unclaimed goods.
62. Goods may be sold: (1) In case it appears that any goods seized in connection
with an offence punishable under this Act would be damaged or broken for
storing for a long time due to rust or for any other reason or would be rotten or
damaged or price of such goods would go down for being old or would be
useless or it could not be stored or maintained for lack of space, such goods
may be sold having completed the process thereof in accordance with the
prevailing laws.
The amount received from the sale pursuant to Sub-section
(1) shall be deposited to the deposit accounts. In case it has been decided that
such goods has to be given to the concerned owner, he shall be entitled only to the
amount received from the sale.
63. No Hindrance to Exercise Powers: Nothing in this Act shall be deemed
to have hindered any authority or officer to exercise powers under other
prevailing laws with regard to investigation, inquires, other actions and filing
or cases relating to corruption.
Power to Frame Rules: Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules for
implementing the objectives of this Act.
Amendment, Repeal and Saving: (1) The following Sections of the Revenue
(Investigation and Control) Act, 2052 have been repealed,-
Clause (c) of Section 2;
Sub-section (2) of Section 6;
The terms "or employee" appearing in sub-Section (4) of Section 9;
Sub-section (2) of Section 18;
Sub-section (2) of Section 21;
Sub-section (2) of Section 23;
The terms "or corruption" frequently used in place to place;

Section 5, chapter 4 and Section 25.
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 2017 has been repealed.
All actions taken and proceedings initiated under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 2017 shall be deemed to have been taken or initiated under
this Act.

===== SOURCE: Right-To-Information(2064).pdf =====

Right to Information Act, 2064 (2007 )
Date of Authentication and publication
5 Shrawan (21 July 2007)
An act No 4 of the year 2064
AN ACT TO MAKE PROVISION FOR RIGHT TO INFORMATION
Preamble, Whereas; it is expedient to make the functions of the sate open and
transparent in accordance with the democratic system and to make responsible and
accountable to the citizen; to make the access of citizens simple and easy to the
information of public importance held in public bodies; to protect sensitive information
that could make adverse impact on the interest of the nation and citizen, and for the
necessity to have legal provisions to protect the right of the citizen to be well-informed
and to bring it into practice, the 'Legislature-Parliament' has enacted this Act.
Chapterone
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be called 'Right to
Information Act, 2064 B.S. (2007 A.D.).
(2) This Act shall come into force from the 30
(Thirty) day of certification.
Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, in this Act:
"Public Body" means the following body and institution list:
A body under the constitution,
A body established by an Act,
A body formed by the Government of Nepal,
Institution or foundation established by the law, public service.
Political Party or organization registered under the preventing law.
Body Corporate under the full or partial ownership or under control
of the Government of Nepal or such body receiving grants from the
Government of Nepal.
Body Corporate formed by a Body established by the Government of
Nepal or the law upon entering into an agreement,
Non-Governmental Organization/Institutions operated by obtaining
money directly or indirectly from the Government of Nepal or
Foreign Government or International Organizations/Institutions,
Any other Body or Institution prescribed as Public Body by the
Government of Nepal by publishing notice in the Gazette.
"Information" means any written document, material, or information related
to the functions, proceedings thereof or decision of public importance made
by a Public Body.
"Public Importance" means a subject related directly or indirectly with the
interest of citizens.
"Document" means any kind of scripted document and the word shall also
includes any audio visual material collected and updated through a
mechanical medium or that can be printed or retrieved.
"Right to Information" means the right to ask for and obtain information of
public importance held in the Public Bodies and this term shall also include
the right to study or observation of any written document, material held in
Public Body or proceedings of such Public Body; to obtain a verified copy
of such document, to visit or observe the place where any construction of
public importance is going on and to obtain verified sample of any material
or to obtain information held in any type of machine through such machine.
"Information Authority" means a person appointed in pursuant to with

Section 6.
"Chief" means the Chief of a Public Body.
"Commission" means the National Information Commission constituted in
pursuant to Section 11.
"Chief Information Commissioner" means a person appointed pursuant to

Section 11.
"Information Commissioner" means a person appointed pursuant Section
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in Rules
framed under this Act.

Chapter2
Right to Information and Provision Regarding the Flow of Information
Right to Information: (1) Every citizen shall, subject to this Act have the right
to information.
(2) Every citizen shall have access to the information held in the public
Bodies.
(3) Notwithstanding anything provided in Sections (1) and (2), the
information held by a Public Body on the following subject matters shall not be
disseminated:
(a) which seriously jeopardizes the sovereignty, integrity, national
security, public peace, stability and international relations of Nepal.
(b) which directly affects the investigation, inquiry and prosecution of a
crime.
(c) Which seriously affects on the protection of economic, trade or
monetary interest or intellectual property or banking or trade
privacy.
(d) Which directly jeopardizes the harmonious relationship subsisted
among various cast or communities.
(e) Which interferes on individual privacy and security of body, life,
property or health of a person.
Provided that, a public Body shall not refrain from the
responsibility of dissemination of information without appropriate
and adequate reason not to flow the information.
(4) If a Public Body has both the information in its record that can be made
public and that cannot be made public in accordance with this Act, the Information
Officer shall have to provide information to the applicant after separating the
information which can be made public.
Responsibility of a Public Body: (1) Each Public Body has to respect and
protect the right to information of citizen.
(2) Public Body shall have following responsibilities for the purpose of
Sub-Section (1):
(a) to classify and update information and make them public, publish
and broadcast,
(b) to make the citizens' access to information simple and easy,
(c) to conduct its functions openly and transparently,
(d) to provide appropriate training and orientation to its staffs,
(3) Public Body may use different national languages and mass media
while publishing, broadcasting or making information public in accordance with
Section (a) of Section (2).
Updating and Publication of Information: (1) A Public Body shall keep its
information updated.
(2) A Public Body, as long as possible, shall update at least of twenty years
old information from the commencement of this Act related to it in pursuant to
Sub-Section (1).
(3) A Public Body shall enlist and publish its following information:
(a) structure and nature of Body,
(b) functions, duties, and powers of Body,
(c) number of employees and working details of Body,
(d) service to be rendered by the Body,
(e) branch and responsible officer of the service providing Body,
(f) fee and time limit required for service,
(g) decision making process and authority,
(h) authority to hear appeal against decision
(i) description of functions performed
(j) name and designation of Chief and Information Officer
(k) list of Acts, Rules, By Laws or Guidelines
(l) updated description of income, expenditures and financial
transactions.
(m) other particulars as prescribed.
(4) Public Body shall have to update and publish the information in
accordance with Sub-Section (3) within three months from the date of
commencement of this Act and in every three months thereafter.
Provision of Information Officer: (1) A Public Body shall arrange for an
Information Officer for the purpose of disseminating information held in its office.
(2) For the purpose of disseminating information in accordance with Sub Section (1), the Chief has to regularly provide information held in the office to the
Information Officer.
(3) Public Body shall set up an Information Section for the purpose of
disseminating information as per necessity.
Procedures of Acquiring Information: (1) A Nepali Citizen, who is
interested to obtain any information under this Act, shall submit an application
before concerned Information Officer by stating reason to receive such
information.
(2) If an application is received pursuant to Sub-Section (1), Information
Officer should provide the information immediately if the information by its
nature could be provided immediately and has to provide within fifteen days from
the date of application if the information by its nature could not be provided
immediately.
(3) If information cannot be provided immediately pursuant to Sub-Section
(2), Information Officer should instantly give a notice with reason to the applicant.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (3), if the requested
information is related to the security of life of person, the information officer
should provide such information within Twenty Four hours of such request.
(5) Information Officer has to provide information in the format as
demanded by the applicant as much as possible.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (5), if any
possibility subsist that the source of information may be damaged or destroyed or
spoilt if it is provided in the format as requested by the applicant, the Information
Officer shall provide such information in appropriate format with stating reason
thereof.
(7) If any individual submitted an application to study or observe the
document, material or activity pursuant to Sub-Section (1), the Information Officer
shall provide a reasonable time to the applicant for the study and observation of
such document, material or activity.
(8) While examining the application received in pursuant to Sub-Section
(1), it is found that the information demanded by the applicant is not related to
such Body, the Information Officer should give notification to the applicant
immediately.
Fee for information: (1) Applicant shall pay fee as prescribed while requesting
information pursuant with Section 7.
Provided that, if different fees are prescribed for any specific information in the
prevailing law, it shall be collected accordingly.
(2) The fee structure, pursuant to Sub-Section (1), shall be based on the
actual cost of providing information.
(3) If the fee prescribed pursuant to Sub-Section (2) is deemed more than
the actual price, the concerned person may file a petition before the Commission.
(4) While examining the petition pursuant to Sub-Section (3), the
commission may order to review the fee if it is found in contrary to Sub-Section
Complaint may be made: (1) If, Information Officer, does not provide
information, denies to provide information, partially provides information,
provides wrong information or does not provide information by stating that the
applicant is not a stakeholder, the concerned person shall make a complaint to the
Chief within (7) days from the date of information denied or partially information
received.
(2) While investigating the complaint received pursuant to Sub-Section (1),
the Chief shall order the Information Officer to provide information as demanded
by applicant if it is found that the information was denied or partially provided or
wrong information was provided and the Information Officer has to provide
information to the concerned applicant if such order is issued.
(3) While conducting investigation pursuant Sub-Section (2), if it is found
that the Information Officer denied to provide information or partially provided
the information knowingly or with mala fide intention or provided wrong
information, the Chief may take departmental action against such Information
Officer.
(4) While investigating pursuant to Sub-Section (2), if it is found that the
information cannot be provided; the Chief shall make a decision accordingly and
provide a notice stating the reasons to the applicant.
Appeal can be made: (1) An individual, who is aggrieved by the decision of the
Chief made pursuant to Sub-Section (4) of Section 9, shall appeal before the
Commission within Thirty Five (35) days of the notice of decision received.
(2) Commission may summon and take statement of the concerned Chief or
Information Officer, order to submit a document, take statement of witness and
evidence or demand copy of the document from a Public Body while deciding the
appeal received pursuant Sub-Section (1).
(3) In the course of proceeding and deciding the appeal pursuant to Sub Section (2), the Commission may do as following:
(a) May order the concerned Chief to provide information, within a
given time, to the appellant without fee, if appeal is found
reasonable.
(b) May dismiss the appeal if it is found not reasonable.
(4) The Commission has to give final verdict on the appeal within sixty
days of the appeal.
(5) Other procedures to be followed by the commission during appeal
pursuant to this Section shall be as prescribed.

Chapter 3
Provision Regarding Commission
Provision Regarding Commission: (1) There shall be an independent National
Information Commission for the protection, promotion and practice of right to
information.
(2) A Chief Information Commissioner and two other Information
Commissioners shall be in the commission.
(3) In order to appoint Chief Information Commissioner and Information
Commissioner, there shall be a committee comprised as follows:
(a) The Speaker – Chairperson
(b) Minister or State Minister for Information and Communication –
Member
(c) President, Federation of Nepalese Journalists – Member
(4) The Government of Nepal, on the recommendation of the Committee
under Sub-Section (3), shall appoint a Chief Information Commissioner and
Information Commissioners, at least one female shall be included in such
appointment.
(5) The Committee pursuant Sub-Section (3) shall follow the inclusive
principle as much as possible while recommending for appointment of Chief
Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners.
(6) The procedures of recommendation pursuant to Sub-Section (3) shall be
as determined by the Recommendation Committee itself.
Qualifications: One shall have the following qualifications to be appointed for
the post of the Chief Information Commissioner and Information Commissioners:
(a) Nepali citizen,
(b) holding at least a Bachelor Degree from a recognized University,
(c) having at least fifteen years of working experience in the field of
communication,
justice,
public
administration,
information technology or management.
Disqualifications: A person with any of the following disqualification shall be
disqualified to be appointed in the post of Chief Information Commissioner and
Information Commissioners:
(a) not having the qualification pursuant Section 12,
(b) convicted by the court in a criminal offence with moral turpitude,
(c) incumbent employee of Government or Public institution,
(d) incumbent in any political position,
(e) Disqualified for appointment under the prevailing laws.
Tenure of Office: (1) The tenure of office of the Chief Information
Commissioner and the Information Commissioner shall be for five years and s/he
shall not be re-appointed in the same Post.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (1), the Information
Commissioner may be re-appointed in the post of Chief Information
Commissioner subject to the provision of tenure of office stated in the same Sub Section.
(3) The recommendation committee pursuant to Sub-Section (3) of Section
11, shall recommend for new appointment of Chief Information Commissioner
and Information Commissioners one month period to the expiry of the tenure of
the office .
Post to be Vacated: The post the Chief Information Commissioner and
Information Commissioner shall be considered vacant under the following
conditions:
(a) In case of his/her death,
(b) In case, s/he completes the age of 65 years,
(c) In case, s/he tenders resignation to the Prime Minister,
(d) In case, his/her term of office is completed,
(e) In case, s/he is convicted by the court in a criminal offence with
moral turpitude ,
(f) In case of s/he is removed from the post pursuant to Section 16.
May Remove From Office: If the meeting of the Legislature-Parliament
endorse the recommendation of the information and communication related
committee of the Legislature-Parliament, with the two third majority of meeting
presented by at least two third members out of total members, for removing Chief
Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner on the ground that s/he
is not fit to hold office for the reason of incompetence or misbehavior or not
carrying out the duties honestly, such Chief Information Commissioner or
Information Commissioner shall be removed from his/her office.
Provided that, the Chief Information Commissioner or Information Commissioner
charged with such accusation shall not be denied for reasonable opportunity of
clarification.
Provision Regarding the Conditions of Service: The remuneration,
conditions of service and facilities for Chief Information Commissioner and
Information Commissioner shall be as prescribed.
Oath of Office: Before taking charge of the office, the Chief Information
Commissioner shall take the oath of office before the Prime Minister and the
Information Commissioner before the Chief Information Commissioner
respectively in the format as laid down in the Schedule.
Functions, Duties and Powers of the Commission: In addition to the
functions, duties and powers stated elsewhere in this Act, the functions, duties and
powers of the Commission shall be as follows:
(a) To observe and study the records and documents of public
importance held in Public Bodies,
(b) To issue order to such Body to enlist and manage the records,
documents and other materials pertaining the information
(c) To issue order to the concerned Public Body to make information
public for citizen's notification,
(d) To prescribe timeframe and order concerned Public Body to
provide information demanded by applicant within such timeframe.
(e) To order concerned party to fulfill the liability as mentioned in this
(f) To provide necessary suggestions and recommendations to the
Government of Nepal and other bodies related to information and
communications regarding the protection and promotion of right to
information.
(g) To issue other appropriate orders regarding the protection,
promotion and exercise of right to information.
Delegation of Power: The commission may delegate any of the functions, duties
or powers, except the power to hear and decide an appeal under Section 9, to the
Chief Information Commissioner, Information Commissioner or any other body or
official, subject to the terms and conditions prescribed for that purpose.
Office of the Commission: The central office of the Commission shall be
located in Kathmandu Valley and the Commission may open its offices in various
places of the country as per necessity.
Staffs of the Commission: (1) Required number of staffs shall be there at the
Commission.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall manage the staffs required for the
Commission.
Expenditure of the Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal shall arrange
necessary budget for the Commission.
(2) The Commission shall also receive necessary financial resources from
other sectors after getting prior permission of the Government of Nepal.
Cooperate with the Commission: Public bodies shall provide necessary
cooperation in the activities of the commission.
Annual Report: (1) The commission shall submit annual Report of its activities
to the Legislature-Parliament through Prime Minister.
(2) The Commission shall publish, the Annual Report pursuant Sub-Section
(1) publicly for the purpose of public notice.
Contact With the Government of Nepal: The Commission shall contact with
the Government of Nepal through the Ministry of Information and
Communication.

Chapter4
Provision Regarding Protection of Information
Provision Regarding Classification of Information: (1) For the protection
of the information related to Sub-Section (3) of Section 3, held in public Body,
there shall be a committee as following to classify the information in policy level:
(a) Chief Secretary of the Government of Nepal Chairperson
(b) Secretary of the concerned Ministry – Member
(c) Expert of concerned subject assigned by the Chief of Office or
Chairperson – Member
(2) The Committee pursuant to Sub-Section (1), regarding the classification
of information under Sub-section 3 of Section (3), has to inform the Commission
by determining the number of years the information should be kept confidential
and method for the protection of information.
(3) A person, who is not satisfied with the classification made by the
committee pursuant to Sub-section (2) may file a review petition before the
commission to make the information public.
(4) The Commission, shall if it finds that any information need not be kept
confidential in the course of review of the petition pursuant to Sub-section (3),
issue an order to public such information.
(5) The information classified pursuant to the Sub-Section (2) may be kept
confidential for a maximum period of thirty years, according to the nature of the
information.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (5), the Committee
shall review in every ten years that any information classified as confidential is
necessary to keep as confidential or not.
(7) While reviewing pursuant to Sub-Section (6), the Committee, if finds
necessary to keep such information confidential for additional period, may decide
the duration and classify as confidential for that period or may classify as nonconfidential if finds not necessary to keep confidential.
Protection of Information: (1) Public Body shall protect the information of
personal nature held in for preventing unauthorized publication and broadcasting.
(2) Personal information held in public Body, except in following
conditions, shall not be used without written consent of concerned person.
(a) In case of preventing a serious threat to life and body of a person or
public health or security.
(b) If required to be disclosed in accordance with prevailing laws.
(c) If required to control the offence of corruption.
Protection of Whistleblower: (1) It shall be a responsibility of an employee of
a Public Body to provide information on any ongoing or probable corruption or
irregularities or any deed taken as offence under the prevailing laws.
It shall be the duty of the information receiver to make the identity of
whistleblower in accordance with Sub-Section (1) confidential.
The whistleblower shall not be terminated from his/her post or punished
with any legal responsibility or caused any loss or harm for giving
information pursuant to Sub-section (1)
If any punishment or harm is done to the whistleblower against Sub-Section
(3), the whistleblower may complaint, along with demand for
compensation, before the commission for revoking such decision.
While investigating the complaint pursuant to Sub-Section (4), the
Commission may order to revoke the decision of removal from the office if
so removed from office and for the compensation if any damages caused to
the whistleblower.
Providing Personal Information: (1) Concerned Body shall provide
information to the concerned person holding a public post, if such concerned
person demands information of during his service in the public Body.
if a person demands for information related with him/her held in
Public Body that Information shall be made available to that person.
The procedure for demanding and acquiring information pursuant to
Sub-Section (1) shall be as mentioned in Section 7.
Fees to received the information pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be
as prescribed in Section 8.
Information not to be Misused: (1) A person who obtains information from a
Public Body shall not misuse the information by not using it for the same purpose
that was considered.
The concerned Public Body may complain to the Commission
against a person who misuses the information against Sub-Section (1).

Chapter5
Provision Regarding Punishment and Compensation
Punishment: (1) If the Commission finds that Chief of public Body or
Information Officer has held back information without valid reason, refused to
information or provided partial or wrong information or destroyed information; the
Commission may impose a fine to such Chief or Information Officer from Rupees
One Thousand Rupees to Twenty Five Thousand Rupees and if such Chief or
Information Officer is in eligible for departmental action, it may write to the
concerned Body for departmental action.
If the Chief of a public Body or Information Officer, delay to provide
information which has to be provided on time without reason, shall be
punished with a fine of Two Hundred Rupees per day so is delayed to
provide the information.
If the Commission writes to the concerned Body for Departmental action
pursuant to Sub-Section (1), the Public Body shall take Departmental action
against that Chief or Information Officer within three months and notify the
same to the Commission.
The Commission may impose a fine between Five Thousand Rupees to
Twenty Five Thousand Rupees considering that seriousness of misuse of
information if any person is found misusing the information acquired from
public Body instead of using it for purpose it was obtained for.
The Commission may impose a fine up to Ten Thousand Rupees to the
concerned person in case its decision or order pursuant this Act is not
abided by.
Compensation: (1) If person incur losses and damages due to not providing
information, denying to provide information, providing partial or wrong
information or destroying the information by the Chief or Information Officer of
Public Body, such person may file a petition before the Commission for
compensation within three months from the date of not acquiring information,
acquiring partial or wrong information or restriction of the information.
(2) If the application pursuant to Sub-Section (1) is found reasonable upon
the investigation, the Commission may compensate the applicant from the
concerned Body with reasonable amount upon considering the actual loses.
Appeal: A person not satisfied with the decision rendered by the Commission
pursuant to Section 32, may appeal before the Appellate Court within thirty five
days of decision received.

Chapter6
Miscellaneous
Information may be Corrected: (1) If anyone believes that the information in
a Public Body on a particular matter is wrong, s/he may file an application before
the concerned Chief along with necessary evidence for the correction of the
information.
(2) The Chief shall conduct necessary investigation regarding the application
pursuant to Sub-Section (1) and if the information held in such Body is found wrong
in the course of investigation, he/she should inform the applicant upon correcting
within seven days from the date of application imformation.
Save to Works done with Good Faith: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, no case shall be filed and no punishment shall be imposed
against the Chief or Information Officer for his/her works regarding the
dissemination of in forvevtion good faith.
To be Pursuant to this Act: All the matters mentioned in this Act shall be
carried out in accordance with this Act, whereas other matters shall be dealt with
pursuant to prevalent laws.
Power to Frame Rules: The Government of Nepal, upon consultation with the
Commission shall frame necessary Rules to implement the objectives of this Act.
Schedule
(Related to Section 18)
I …………………….. ,hereby, faithful to the state and the people promise with truth and
trust/take the oath in the name of God that highly respecting the shall expressed by the
people through the people's movement that Nepal's state authority and sovereignty is to
be vested only on the people, professing allegiance to the constitution of Nepal and laws
of the land, I shall carry out my responsibilities with honesty and without any fear,
sycophancy, partiality, malice or greed, by honoring citizen's right to information and for
the effective implementation and practice of laws pertaining to right to information.

===== SOURCE: Security of the Health Workers and Health(2066).pdf =====

Security of the Health Workers and Health
Organizations Act, 2066 (2010)
Date of Authentication and Publication
2066.1.21 (4 May, 2009)
Act Number 2 of the year 2066 (2010)
An Act made to provide for the security of health workers and health
organizations
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary legal provisions on the
security of health workers and health organization against casual incidents and
economic liabilities that may arise in the course of medical treatment, with a view
to make health services regular, reliable, decent and effective;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Constituent Assembly pursuant to
Clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2063 (2007).

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be called as the
"Security of the Health Workers and Health Organizations Act, 2066
(2009).”
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this
Act,-
"Health worker" means a health worker registered pursuant to Section
"Health organization" means a health organization registered pursuant
to Section 7.
"Security" means economic and other security as well made under this
Act for the health workers and health organizations.
"Ministry" means the Ministry of Health and Population.
"Committee" means the health worker and health organization
security coordination committee as referred to in Section 5.
"Fund" means the health worker and health organization security fund
as referred to in Section 12.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
this Act or the rules framed under this Act.
Prohibition on doing acts such as manhandling, lock-out and
destruction: No one shall do or cause to be done any of the following acts:
Besieging (gherau), manhandling or doing degrading treatment to any
health worker on the issue of medical treatment,
Destructing, setting fire to, any health organization or doing similar
other act.
Request for security: (1) If any person commits or attempts to commit any
act against any health worker or in any health organization in contravention
of Section 3, such a health worker or health organization may make a request
to the local administration for security.
(2) If a request for security is made pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
local administration shall have to arrange for security immediately.
(3) If, in view of any place and situation, obstruction in the services to
be provided by any health organization is likely to occur, and permanent
arrangement of security is necessary, and the committee writes for such
security, the Government of Nepal may arrange for security in such a health
organization permanently.
(4) Other provisions relating to the security of the health workers and
health organizations shall be as prescribed.
Provisions relating to formation of committee: (1) There shall be
formed a health worker and health organization security coordination
committee consisting of the following chairperson and members for carrying
out acts relating to the security of the health workers and health
organizations in a coordinated manner.
Chief Specialist, Medical Service
Division, Ministry
-Chairperson
Representative, Ministry of Home
Affairs
-Member
Chairperson,
Nepal
Medical
Association
-Member
Chairperson,
Nepal
Health
Technicians Association
-Member
Chairperson,
Nepal
Ayurveda
Medical Association
-Member
Chairperson,
Nepal
Nursing
Association
-Member
Chairperson, Association of Private
Health Institute of Nepal
-Member
(2) An officer level employee designated by the Secretary at the
Ministry shall act as the secretary of the committee.
(3) The secretariat of the committee shall be situated in the Ministry.
(4) The Ministry shall make available such employees as may be
required for the secretariat of the committee.
(5) The Rules of procedures relating to the meeting of the committee
shall be as prescribed.
Functions, duties and powers of the committee: The functions, duties
and powers of the committee shall be as follows:
To approve plans and programmes relating to the security of the
health workers and health organizations and implement, or cause to be
implements such plans and programs,
To maintain coordination between the concerned bodies as to the
security of the health workers and health organizations,
To provide compensation, on behalf of the health workers and health
organizations, to the concerned persons pursuant to court judgments,
To give suggestions to the Government of Nepal in respect of the
policies to be pursued on the security of the health workers and health
organizations,
To perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
Name to be registered: (1) Any health worker or health organization who
intends to have security pursuant to this Act shall have to register his/her
name with the committee.
(2) An application, accompanied by the certificate obtained by them
from the health related professional council, in the case of a health worker
who intends to get his or her name registered pursuant to Sub-section (1),
and by the certification of incorporated obtained in accordance with the laws
in force, in the case of a health organization who so intends to get its name
registered, has to be made to the committee.
Provided that, a governmental health organization shall not be
required to attach the certificate of incorporation.
(3) If, upon examination of an application received pursuant to Subsection (2), it appears reasonable to register the name, the committee shall
enter the name of such a health worker or health organization in the register
and give a certificate thereof in the prescribed form to the applicant.
Fees to be paid: (1) In making an application pursuant to Section 7, there
shall be charged the fees as prescribed.
(2) The health workers and health organizations shall have to pay the
fees as prescribed to the committee each year.
Provided that, in making a request for permanent security pursuant to
Sub-section (3) of Section 4, a non-governmental health organization shall
have to pay such additional fees as prescribed.
Crossing name off the register: In any of the following circumstances,
the committee may cross the name of a health worker or health organization
off the register:
If the committee receives information that the worker or organization
is not eligible to perform acts of health services under the laws in
force,
If the worker or organization fails to pay the fees referred to in Subsection (2) of Section 8,
If the worker or organization makes an application to the committee
for the crossing the name off the register,
If the registration of the health worker or health organization is
cancelled pursuant to the laws in force.
Records to be updated: The committee shall update the records of the
health workers and health organizations which have been registered pursuant
to this Act.
Committee to bear expenses incurred in defense: (1) The committee
shall bear such reasonable expenses as may be incurred in the defense made
by the concerned health worker and health organization in a case filed in a
court claiming for compensation against such a health worker and health
organization.
Provided that, the committee shall not bear any expenses incurred in
the defense in relation to any loss and damage resulted from a mala fide
intention or recklessness on the part of such a health worker or health
organization.
(2) A health worker or health organization intending to request for the
provision of the defense related expenses from the committee pursuant to
Sub-section (1) shall have to provide such description as may be prescribed
to the committee.
Provision of fund: (1) There shall be a fund by the name of the health
worker and health organization security fund.
(2) The following amounts shall be credited to the fund:
Amounts received from the Government of Nepal,
Amounts received pursuant to Section 8,
Amounts received from any other source.
(3) The amounts of the fund shall be deposited in an account opened
with any commercial bank within Nepal.
(4) The fund shall be operated as prescribed.
Use of fund: The amounts credited into the fund may be spent in the
following acts:
To make payment of the amount pursuant to a judgment handed down
by a court ordering the provision of compensation to the concerned
person in relation to the services provided by any health worker and
health organization,
Provided that, the committee shall not bear the amount of
compensation required to be provided to the concerned person by a
court judgment in relation to any loss or damage resulted from the
mala fide intention or serious recklessness on the part of the health
worker and health organization.
To make payment of such reasonable expenses as may be incurred in
making defense in a case filed in a court against the health worker and
health organization,
To carry out the functions of the committee.
Accounts and audit: (1) The accounts of the incomes and expenditure of
the fund shall be maintained in accordance with the laws in force.
(2) The accounts shall be audited by the Auditor General.
Punishment: (1) A person who commits the following offense shall be
punished as follows:
A fine of Five Thousand Rupees to Twenty Thousand
Rupees according to the gravity of offense in the case of
the commission of an offense as referred to in Clause (a)
of Section 3,
A fine of up to Three Hundred Thousand Rupees or
imprisonment for a term of One month to One year or
with both punishments according to the gravity of
offense in the case of the commission of an offense as
referred to in Clause (b) of Section 3.
(2) If any health worker or health organization suffers any loss or
damage as a result of any act or action done or taken by the person
committing offense pursuant to Sub-section (1), the court shall order also the
provision of reasonable compensation for such loss or damage by the
concerned offender.
Government to be plaintiff: Government of Nepal shall be the plaintiff in
case referred to in Clause (b) of Section 3 and such a case shall be deemed to
have been included in Schedule-1 of the Government of Cases Act, 2049.
Limitation: A law suit shall have to be filed within Three months after the
date of commission of the offense referred to in Section 3.
Power to form sub-committee: (1) The committee may, as required,
form a sub-committee involving the experts in the concerned field for the
operation of its activities.
(2) The functions, duties and powers and procedures of the subcommittee formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the
committee.
Meeting allowance: The members of the committee or a sub-committee
formed pursuant to Section 18 shall receive such meeting allowance as may
be prescribed for taking part in a meeting of the committee or subcommittee.
Delegation of powers: The committee may, as required, delegate any of
the powers conferred on it to any member of the committee or a subcommittee formed pursuant to Section 18.
Not to bar the taking of action in accordance with the laws in force:
Where any act committed by any person in contravention of this Act is also
punishable under the laws in force, nothing contained in this Act shall be
deemed to bar the taking of action against that person in accordance with the
laws in force.
Powers to frame Rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary
Rules for the accomplishment of the objects of this Act.

===== SOURCE: The Consumer Protection Act(2075).pdf =====

The Consumer Protection Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 10 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Amendment and Consolidation of Laws
Relating to Consumer Protection
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make amendment to and consolidation of the legal
provisions relating to consumer protection in order to protect and promote constitutional
rights of the consumers to obtain quality goods and services, to provide judicial remedy
for the enforcement of the rights obtained by the consumers, and provide compensation
for harm and injury likely to be caused to the consumers;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the “Consumer
Protection Act, 2075 (2018)."
This Act shall commence immediately.
Definition: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act,-
"Court" means the Consumer Court referred to in Section 41.
"Unfair trade and business" means any activity referred to in Section
"Production" means the process of producing, preparing, refining,
changing, mixing, packaging or repackaging, assembling or
labeling, or any or all the processes to be adopted in this regard
"Consumer" means a person or institution that consumes or uses any
goods or services.
"Consumer association" means the institution established under the
prevailing law with the objective of protecting and promoting the
rights and welfare of the consumers.
"Central Monitoring Committee" means the Central Market
Monitoring Committee referred to in Section 25.
"Sub-standard goods" means consumer goods of any of the
following conditions:
Goods the quality of which falls short of the standards
determined under Section 6 or in which the quantity of an
essential ingredient has been lowered, or any other material
has been mixed.
Goods which are stale, rotten or stored or prepared in dirty
or toxic conditions or in which any chemical, colour or
flavour has been used, so that they become harmful to human
health,
Goods which are fully or partly made of any diseased or
disease-generating animals or birds or harmful vegetation,
Goods which are produced, transported, hoarded, stored or
sold without meeting the standard prescribed,
Goods which have no quality of consumable goods if it is
prescribed, and as mentioned by the producer, if it is not
prescribed,
Goods the quality of which falls short of the minimum
necessary standards or exceeds the maximum standards
prescribed, if any, in this Act or in the rules framed under
this Act.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the rules framed under this Act.
"Inspection Officer" means the Inspection Officer appointed or
designated pursuant to Section 32.
"Council" means the Consumer Protection Council to be formed
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 22.
"Laboratory" means the body established with the objective of
testing the purity, perfection or quality of the goods and recognized
by the Government of Nepal.
"Ministry" means the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supply
of the Government of Nepal.
"Label" means a tag, sign, picture or other descriptive thing written,
printed, lithographed, signed, embossed, included or displayed in
any other manner, in or on the goods or the container containing
such goods.
"Goods" means the substance which the consumers consume or use
or the materials made of the mixture of goods which do not inflict
harm and injury or any kind of side effect to health, and this term
also includes the raw material, colour, fragrance or chemical to be
used in the production of such goods.
"Price of goods" means the price the price labeled at the time of
production, maximum retail price (M.R.P.), the price fixed in the
import declaration form or the price fixed at the source by the
producer.
"Seller" means the person, firm, company or institution that sells
and distributes goods or services.
"Department" means the Commerce, Supplies and Consumer
Welfare Protection Department.
"Service" means electricity, drinking water supply, telephone,
information technology, health, education and consultation,
transport, drainage, banking or other services of similar nature, and
this term also includes legal, medical or engineering services.
"Defective product" means any goods or services that do not contain
such minimum safety measures due to any of the following as are
reasonably expected by the general people while using any product:
defective design, construction, refinement, mixture or
installation,
defective packaging, protection or storage,
defective presentation,
lack of sufficient measure or precaution to control the
potential risk or hazard as per the nature of the produced
goods or services,
product which is different or pirated or imitated from the
product produced by the manufacturing company possessing
the intellectual property right.

Chapter-2
Provisions Relating to Consumers Protection
Rights of the consumer: (1) Every consumer shall have the right to obtain quality
goods and services.
Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), for the
purpose of protecting the rights, interests and concern of the consumers, every
consumer shall have the following rights:
right of easy access to goods or services,
right to choose quality goods or services at the fair
competitive price,
right to be informed of the price, quantity, purity, quality etc.
of the goods or services,
right to obtain information from the producer, importer or
seller regarding the quantity, ingredient or percentage of the
substances contained in the goods made of or produced with
the mixture of two or more than two substances,
right to be safe from the sale and distribution of the goods
and services that inflict harm to the human body, life, health
and property,
right to get appropriate legal action taken against the unfair
trade and business activities,
right to obtain compensation against harm and injury caused
with the use of goods or services,
right to receive remedy or hearing from the competent
authority or entity on the protection of the rights and interests
of the consumers,
right to get consumer education.
Regulation of goods or services: (1) The Government of Nepal shall regulate the
supplies, price, quality, measurement, label, advertisement of the goods and
services regularly in order to protect the rights of the consumers.
The Ministry shall perform the following functions in conducting
regulation pursuant to sub-section (1):
to implement the policy relating to quality, price
determination and supply system of goods or services,
to prevent or control monopoly or unfair trade activities that
cause or possibly cause adverse impact upon the rights and
interests of the consumers, or to formulate and implement a
plan of action in this regard,
to maintain fair market by continuously analyzing and
reviewing the condition of demand and supply of the goods
or services used within the country,
to make necessary provisions to prevent and control the price
determined or increased in an undesired manner by the
producer, seller or distributor of the goods or services,
to facilitate the supply system through the institutions or
private firms or companies having full or partial ownership
of the Government of Nepal in order to ensure the supplies
of the food and other goods for the consumers at a fair price
and easy manner,
to fix the maximum quantity of the storage of the goods in
any special circumstance, or at any particular place, for the
period prescribed,
to receive foods from the producers at the prescribed price
and sell them to the general people with determining certain
quantity of such foods in case there is a shortage of any foods
produced within Nepal,
to make necessary provision to maintain uniformity in the
price in general, by managing wholesale or retail business,
to coordinate with the concerned agencies to prevent
artificial shortage of any goods or services from occurring or
to regularly distribute the goods in all places, for protecting
the rights of the consumers and regulating the supply system,
to regulate the sale and distribution system of goods, and
control the act of creating scarcity or black-marketing in an
inappropriate manner or the unfair business activities.
The Government of Nepal may, in order to protect the rights of the
consumers, regulate the supply system and control the price and quality of the
goods and services, make necessary policy and institutional provisions from time
to time.
The provision referred to in sub-section (3) shall have to be
implemented as prescribed.
Quality of goods and services: (1) In case the quality or standards of any
substance inherent in any goods have not been determined, the Government of
Nepal shall determine the standards or quality of such goods or services by
fulfilling the process as prescribed.
The Government of Nepal shall have to publish the notice of the
matters of the standards or quality of any goods or service determined pursuant to
sub-section (1) in the Nepal Gazette.
To affix label: (1) A producer shall have to affix label on the goods produced by
him or her.
The following matters shall have to be mentioned in the label
pursuant to sub-section (1):
Name, address of the producer and registration number of the
industry,
Mixture, ingredient of mixture, quantity and weight of the
goods, in such goods as food, medicines and cosmetics,
In the case of the goods of which quality has been
determined, the quality of such goods,
Mode of using the goods and side effect likely to occur due
to the use of such goods,
In the case of the goods supposed to be used within a certain
deadline, such deadline,
Retail price, batch number and date of manufacture of the
goods,
If it is electronic, hardware, electrical or machinery or goods
to be in use for a long time, guarantee or warranty and
guarantee or warranty date of such goods, and other
necessary things in accordance with the law related to such
goods,
If any defect is seen in the condition referred to in clause (g),
provision to make reimbursement or to repair until certain
period,
In the case of the goods that are inflammable, hazardous or
likely to break down easily, details relating to precaution to
be adopted for the safety of such goods,
Maximum retail price to be incurred after including all types
of taxes applicable for the goods,
If any process is supposed to be fulfilled prior to using any
goods, such process; and harm and injury likely to occur
when it is used without fulfilling such process,
Use of awareness-oriented message, picture or sign on the
label of the materials of the types of causing harm upon
human health,
Other matters as prescribed.
The matters to be specified in the label pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall have to be written in the Nepali or English language by the producer in the
case of the goods produced within Nepal and by the importer in the case of the
goods imported, in the way which can be understood by common people.
The goods on which label is not affixed pursuant to sub-section (3)
shall not be allowed to be imported, sold and distributed in Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, it
shall not be necessary to specify the matters set forth in this Section, while selling
consumable goods such as vegetables, fruits to be sold openly.
Provided that the label shall have to be affixed on the imported vegetables
and fruits.

Chapter-3
Liability of Parties Associated to Marketing of Goods or Services
Liability of producer: (1) While producing goods or services, the producer shall
have to fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled
under the prevailing laws:
to produce quality goods or services,
to determine the label of the goods,
to specify the matters referred to in Section 6 on the label,
not to produce defective product,
to collect and destroy the goods produced by him or her if it
is informed that such goods remain in the market upon
having been defectively produced,
to provide reasonable compensation if any kind of damage is
caused to the consumer due to the manufacture of goods and
service,
not to make wrong or misleading advertisement or publicity
of the goods or services,
to provide the consumer with information as to the quantity,
ingredients or percentage of the substances contained in the
goods made of or produced with the mixture of two or more
than two substances.
to fulfill such other conditions as prescribed by the law.
If the liability pursuant to sub-section (1) is not fulfilled or any
fault, deficiency and defect occurs in the process of production, construction,
refinement, design, formula, preparation, import, packing, labeling, and harm and
injury is caused to anyone’s body, life, property after using such goods or services,
the producer of such goods or services shall be responsible for such harm and
injury and shall have the liability to provide compensation for the same.
Provided that,
it must be the actual producer of the goods or services, the
use of which causes harm and injury,
direct cause must be established that harm and injury is
caused with the consumption or use of the goods or services
as claimed for causing such harm and injury.
Liability of importer: (1) While importing goods, the importer shall have to
fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under
to import without exceeding or making different from the
cost price,
to provide details of the goods relating to the imported goods
when so demanded by the concerned agency or official,
not to import the goods prohibited to be imported under the
prevailing law,
to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), except for
the provision made otherwise as per the quality or nature of any goods, the goods
shall be forbidden to be imported which are not supposed to or cannot be used
after six months from the date of being imported or which cannot be used after the
expiry of such period.
If anyone imports the goods without specifying the matters to be
specified on the label, and if harm and injury is caused to anybody due to the use
of such goods, the importer shall be responsible for such harm and injury and be
liable to provide compensation for the same.
Liability of carrier: The carrier shall have to fulfill the following liabilities, in
addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under law:
to transport within the determined time period as per the
nature of the goods to be imported,
to prevent degradation in the quality of goods while
transporting,
to completely abide by the safety arrangement and the
conditions to be abided by as prescribed, while transporting,
to provide the details of the goods when the concerned
agency or official so demands,
to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
Liability of hoarder: The hoarder who hoards the goods shall have to fulfill the
following liabilities in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under the prevailing
to exercise care as per the nature of the goods while hoarding
such goods,
to hoard upon adopting safety measures as prescribed so as
to prevent degradation in the quality as per the type or nature
of the goods, and not to do any act that may cause
degradation in the quality of goods,
not to change or replace the label or details specified by the
producer,
to provide the details of the goods related to the hoarding of
the goods when the concerned agency or the official so
demands,
to adopt safety measures as prescribed,
to fulfill other liabilities as prescribed.
Liability of seller: The seller who sells the goods shall have to fulfill the following
liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under the law:
to sell the goods to the consumers without discrimination,
to safely keep and safely sell the goods as per the type or
nature by preventing degradation,
to keep price list of the goods so that it is clearly seen and
understood by general people,
to provide storage or details of the goods remained with him
or her when the concerned agency or official so demands,
to abide by the provision of guarantee or warranty, if any, in
the goods,
to sell the goods to the customers on a first-come-first-served
basis,
to give the bill or receipt on selling the goods,
to fulfill other liabilities as prescribed.
Liability of service provider: The service provider providing service to the
consumer shall have to fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities
to be fulfilled under the law:
to provide the consumer with the service without
discrimination,
to keep nature of the service to be provided and the list of the
price to be paid by the consumers for such service received,
at the place visible to everyone, so that it is clearly
understood by the general people,
to provide the details and documents related to the service to
be provided when the concerned agency or official so
demands,
to provide the service to the customer on a first-come-firstserved basis,
to give the bill or receipt after receiving the amount for the
service provided to the consumer,
to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
To determine level of market: For the purpose of protecting the rights of
consumers, managing the market in accordance with the market rule and making
market fair and transparent, the levels of market involved in taking the prescribed
goods or services from the producer or importer to the final consumer shall be as
prescribed.
To return goods: (1) If anyone wishes to return, being dissatisfied with, any goods
purchased from the seller, he or she may return it to the seller within seven days
or take other similar goods equal to that price or the payment of the amount which
was paid while purchasing such goods.
(2) While returning the goods pursuant to sub-section (1), the seller shall
not be allowed to make deduction in the price or take any kind of additional charge.
(3) While returning the goods pursuant to sub-section (1), the bill or receipt
given by the seller at the time of purchasing such goods shall have to be produced.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no goods may
be returned or taken as replacement in the following circumstances:
if the quality or quantity of such goods is altered by the
purchaser after the purchase,
in the case of the goods of such nature that they must be used
within the certain deadline, such deadline has already
expired,
in the case of the goods of such nature as being rotten,
overripe, such as milk, fruits, fish, meat, in case they are not
consumed instantly,
if the purchased goods are already used,
if the seal is broken off in the case of sealed goods.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, in the
case of sealed goods, such goods may be returned within fifteen days, in the
unbroken condition of the seal, or other similar goods equal to the same price may
be taken instead of such goods.
To keep bill or invoice: (1) The importer, carrier, hoarder and seller shall have to
keep with them the producer or purchase bill or invoice of the goods or services
purchased for the purpose of sale.
(2) The bill or invoice shall have to be shown at the time when the
concerned official so demands.

Chapter-4
Prohibited Activities
Not to conduct unfair trade and business activities: (1) No one shall conduct or
cause to conduct unfair trade and business activities.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), if any of the following activities is
conducted, an unfair trade and business activity shall be deemed to have been
taken place:
selling or providing the goods or services by lying,
concealing, hiding or misleading the actual quality, quantity,
price, measurement, format or composition etc. of such
goods or services,
releasing false or misleading advertisement, or selling the
goods by making misleading advertisement,
doing any of the following acts through oral, written or visual
means in the case of goods or services:
selling sub-standard goods by showing standard,
quality, quantity, class, composition, design as if
having specialty or quality,
selling re-produced or old goods showing or
misrepresenting that they are new one,
advertising or notifying and disseminating, in false
and misleading manner, while selling the goods or
services even when no benefit is obtained as declared,
claiming, guaranteeing or selling any goods through
consumption or use of such goods without factual
ground.
determining price in a manner to shift burden upon the
consumer price on the ground different than the ground of
actual cost of any goods or services, or fixing the price by
including the cost of any contest, lottery, occasion, or selling
at such price,
determining price by including the price or cost of other
goods to be obtained as donation, gift or without charge upon
the price of any goods or service, or selling such goods or
service at such price,
producing, mixing up or supplying or transporting or
hoarding or selling the goods so as to become less or more
than the quality or standard in any goods or service, or to
inflict harm and injury upon the consumer from the use of
such goods or service,
creating artificial shortage of, hoarding or selling, any goods,
selling the goods by including the price of goods destroyed
by defective product or the price of goods contracted in the
course of business transaction in the cost price of other
goods,
producing or importing fake goods or selling such goods to
displace any goods,
refusing to issue bill or invoice of the sold goods or service,
or not issuing bill or invoice, or demanding additional
amount while issuing bill, invoice,
using poison or any chemical so as to inflict harm and injury
upon the consumer while using any goods, or selling the
goods so used,
selling the already expired goods by affixing new label on
such goods which is not consumable or is not supposed to be
used,
importing, producing or selling sub-standard goods which
cannot be used,
providing service without specifying the price, quality of
service, venue and time to provide service by a professional
service provider,
selling so as to become contrary to sub-section (1) of Section
17 in collusion with the producer, importer, carrier, hoarder
or seller or such person and other person, organization and
institution,
selling or providing by setting up levels or series more than
the business level prescribed while selling or providing any
goods or services,
selling without fulfilling the structure, measurement or
standard if any, prescribed for selling or providing any goods
or service.
Not to cause adverse impact on demand, supply or price: (1) No one shall sell,
distribute or transport or hinder the sale and distribution of any goods by taking
profit higher than that prescribed and over the cost invested in the production,
import, transport, hoarding or sale and distribution of that goods.
No one shall cause adverse impact on the demand, supply or price
of any goods or service by doing any of the following acts, in association with any
person, institution or anyone else:
determining quota of the raw materials required for the
manufacture of any goods, or reducing the production of any
goods or doing any other such work,
creating artificial shortage by hoarding any goods or service
or by any other manner,
selling the goods or service at the determined time or place
only or doing other acts of similar nature.
Other act not to be done regarding goods or service: No one shall do or cause
to be done any of the following acts, regarding any goods or services:
producing, selling
or importing
sub-standard
goods
knowingly,
selling any goods or services by lying or deceiving that the
goods or services are other goods or services and stating high
standard goods for low standard goods or services,
producing or selling the goods or service that cause adverse
impact upon the health of consumer,
affecting the price and supply system by creating shortage of
the goods by accompanying with businesspersons or business
groups in order to manufacture, import or sell various goods
of the same nature,
operating service by adopting a circle system, quota system,
rotational system, trip system or token system, in cooperation
with more than one business persons or business groups that
provide any service of the same nature,
making a provision requiring to purchase other goods too,
while purchasing any goods.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Determination of Price of Goods or Services
List of essential food and other goods and service: (1) The Government of Nepal
shall determine the list of essential food and other goods or services by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette from time to time.
The maximum price of essential food and other goods or services
shall also have to be fixed in the list pursuant to sub-section (1).
While selling the goods or service pursuant to sub-section (1), the
seller shall not sell, or cause to be sold, the same in a price higher than that referred
to in sub-section (2).
To keep price list and registration certificate: (1) Price list shall have to be kept
by clearly specifying the factory price of each of the goods by the producer,
wholesale or retail price of goods to be sold and distributed by the seller, and price
of the service to be provided by the service provider.
If it is an industry to produce the goods, the industry registration
certificate, and in the case of business, business registration, license shall have to
be displayed at the place of sale in a way visible to the general people.
The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, establish a price information center as prescribed.
The producer and wholesaler or retailer located in the district
concerned shall have to provide the factory price and the wholesale or retail price
respectively to the price information center established pursuant to sub-section
Provision to determine standard of price of goods or service: (1) The agency
as prescribed shall prepare the standards relating to determination of price of
goods or services as prescribed.
While preparing standards relating to price determination pursuant
to sub-section (1), profit amount to be taken by the seller also shall have to be
accepted as basis in such a way that production cost of the goods, transport
expenses, custom, tax, charge paid by the importer pursuant to law shall not be
more than the percentage fixed while selling.
While preparing standards relating to the determination of price of
any service, if the agency prescribed pursuant to sub-section (1) has assigned
anybody or authority in accordance with the law regulating or managing the
conduct and functions of the person who provides such a service, the standards
shall have to be prepared as per the standards determined by such a body or
authority.
While preparing standards, in case the standards are not determined
even after the body or authority is assigned pursuant to sub-section (3), such a
body or authority shall have to be consulted with.
While preparing standards relating to the determination of price
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (3), the standards may be determined differently to
make the maximum price, be taken for such goods or services provided, on the
basis of the geographical region, nature of the services and particular place.

Chapter-6
Consumers Protection Council
Formation of Consumers Protection Council: (1) There shall be formed a
Consumer Protection Council in order to make policy on the matters of protecting
and implementing the rights of consumers and performing other functions under
this Act.
The Council referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of the
following Chairperson and Members:
Minister for Industry, Commerce and Supplies - Chairperson
Secretary, Ministry of Industry, Commerce
and Supplies
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Land Management,
Cooperative and Poverty Alleviation
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Finance
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Population -Member
Chairperson, Federation of Nepalese Chambers
of Commerce and Industry
-Member
Chairperson, Nepal Chamber of Commerce
-Member
Chairperson, Confederation of Nepal Industries -Member
Chairperson, Federation of Nepal National
Industries and Entrepreneurs
-Member
Two persons including one woman
nominated by the Ministry from among
the persons having experience of at least
five years in the body or institution related
to the rights and welfare of the consumers -Member
Director General, the Department -Member-Secretary
The term of the Members nominated pursuant to clause (m) of subsection (2) shall be of two years, and they may be nominated again for another
term.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Ministry
may remove such a Member from the post at any time if any act is done contrary
to the rights and interests of the consumers or act is done in such a way that it
becomes contrary to the functions, duties and powers of the Council.
Before removing from the post pursuant to sub-section (4), he or she
shall have to be given a reasonable opportunity to submit clarification.
The Chairperson and Members of the Council shall be entitled to the
meeting allowance facility as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
Meeting of Council: (1) The meeting of the Council shall be convened at the date,
time and place fixed by the Chairperson.
The meeting of the Council shall be convened at least twice a year,
and the interval between the two meetings shall not be more than six months.
If more than fifty percent members of the total members of the
Council are present, it shall be deemed to constitute a quorum for the meeting of
the Council.
The Chairperson of the Council shall preside over the meeting, and
in his or her absence, the Member selected from among the Members shall preside
over the meeting.
Experts and scientists of different sectors, communities may be
invited to the meeting as necessary.
The decision of the Council shall be authenticated by the Member Secretary of the Council.
Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Council shall be as
determined by the Council itself.
The Department shall perform the functions as the Secretariat of the
Council.
Functions, duties and powers of the Council: The functions, duties and powers
of the Council shall be as follows:
to submit to the Government of Nepal by determining
policies on the matters regarding the protection and
enforcement of the rights of the consumers, supply system
and the determination of price and quality of goods and
services,
to provide necessary recommendation to the Government of
Nepal regarding the amendment, improvement in the existing
policies or new policies which are to be made regarding the
protection of the rights of consumers,
to disseminate and cause to be disseminated information
relating to the rights and welfare of the consumers to get the
consumers informed regarding the goods and services,
to inform or get the consumers informed regarding the price,
quality, quantity, purity and unfair trade activities of the
goods or services,
to make necessary policy arrangements for including the
consumer education in the curriculum from secondary level
up to the university level,
to draft necessary policies to cooperate with national and
international organizations or institutions related to the
rights of consumers,
to give directive to the Provincial Government or Local
Level to protect and promote the rights of the consumers as
necessary,
to perform such other functions as prescribed.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Inquiry, Inspection and Monitoring
Central Market Monitoring Committee: (1) A Central Market Monitoring
Committee shall be formed for the protection of the rights and interests of the
consumers or for making coordination among the bodies involved in the
monitoring or inspection of the supply system, price, quality and purity of the
goods or services.
(2) The Central Market Monitoring Committee referred to in sub-section
(1) shall consist of the following Members:
Secretary, Ministry of Industry, Commerce
and Supplies
-Coordinator
Joint-secretary, Ministry of Industry,
Commerce and Supplies (responsible
the supplies)
-Member
Joint-secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Land Management,
Cooperative and Poverty Alleviation
-Member
Director General, Department of Food
Technology and Quality Control
-Member
Director General, Nepal Bureau of Standards
-Member
Director General, Department of Drug
Management
-Member
Director General, Department -Member-Secretary
(3) The procedures relating to the meeting of the Central Market
Monitoring Committee shall be as prescribed.
Function, duties and powers of Central Market Monitoring Committee: The
functions, duties and powers of the Central Market Monitoring Committee shall
be as follows:
to take necessary initiative to make the goods or services
easily available, by identifying their shortage seen in the
market,
to monitor and supervise regarding the supply system, price,
weight, quality, purity etc. of the goods or services in the
market,
to make recommendation of the procedures of operation of
market monitoring, monitoring team and consumers
organizations and institutions,
to maintain coordination in the functions of the Market
Monitoring Team and Local Monitoring Committee,
to give necessary directives to the bodies that protect the
rights and interests of the consumers and law enforcement
bodies in order to make market monitoring effective,
to set up the Consumers Information Center,
to form committees or sub-committees as necessary,
to perform such other functions as prescribed.
Provincial Market Monitoring Committee: (1) The Provincial Government
may, in order to make necessary arrangements for protection of the rights and
welfare of the consumers, form a Provincial Market Monitoring Committee by a
notification in the Provincial Gazette, for carrying out inspection and monitoring
on the matters relating to the supply system, price, quality, purity of the goods or
services.
The Provincial Market Monitoring Committee referred to in subsection (1) may form monitoring teams or sub-committees as necessary.
The functions, duties and powers of the Provincial Market
Monitoring Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
Other provisions relating to the functions of the Provincial Market
Monitoring Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in accordance with
the rules framed by the Provincial Government.
Local Market Monitoring Committee: (1) The Rural Municipality or
Municipality may, for the protection of the rights of consumers under this Act,
form a Local Market Monitoring Committee for carrying out field inspection and
monitoring of the market on the matters relating to the supply system, price,
quality, purity of the goods or services.
The Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall also consist of
the bodies and consumers under the Local Level in necessary numbers.
The functions, duties, powers, work procedures and other necessary
matters of Local Market Monitoring Committee to be formed pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
The Local Market Monitoring Committee to be formed pursuant to
sub-section (1) may form market monitoring teams or sub-committees as
necessary.
To form Market Monitoring Team: (1) In order to monitor and supervise
regularly as to whether any unfair business activity has taken place pursuant to

Section 16, price list is kept or not pursuant to Section 20, and regarding the
quality, quantity or price of goods or services, Market Monitoring Team or
Subject-wise Monitoring Team or Joint Monitoring Team consisting of the expert
of the related sector as well as Inspection Officer may be formed as prescribed.
The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub-section (1) may get
information about or enquire into the quality, quantity, price determination of any
goods or services.
The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub-section (1) may,
while getting information or making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2), demand
necessary document and evidence, and it shall be the duty of the producer or seller
concerned to submit such document or evidence.
The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub-section (1) may
exercise all the powers conferred to the Inspection Officer under this Act.
The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub-section (1) shall,
while making monitoring and inspection of the market, use the market monitoring
and inspection form as prescribed.
To make inquiry or inspection: (1) If there is reasonable ground to believe that
any person is doing unfair trade or business activity, doing the act of affecting the
price or supply system by maintaining monopoly or any other manner in the
market, or producing or selling and distributing sub-standard goods, or doing any
act contrary to this Act or the rule framed under this Act, or if information is
received regarding such matters through any means of communication or any
complaint or through anyone that carries out surveillance, the Ministry or
Department may immediately inquire into or inspect that matter or cause such
inquiry or inspection to be made.
Inspection or monitoring shall be carried out accordingly if the
prevailing law provides for monitoring and inspection, with respect to the
inspection or inquiry pursuant to sub-section (1), and in other circumstances, the
Ministry may form immediately an inspection or inquiry committee or designate
any committee formed under this Act or the Inspection Officer to that effect.
Any producer, dealer, agent, seller, person or institution found
guilty from the inquiry or inspection pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be liable to
action under this Act or the prevailing law.
(4) If upon inspection or inquiry, the committee or the Inspection Officer
designated pursuant to sub-section (2) does not find that such an act falls under
this Act, the committee or the officer shall send the matter, along with the inquiry
or inspection file, to the concerned body for necessary action; and such a body
shall also give information about the action taken in that respect to such a
committee or officer.
Power to carry out casual inspection: (1) The Department may carry out casual
inspection for the protection of the rights, interests of the consumers.
Other provisions relating to casual inspection shall be as prescribed.
Power to appoint or designate Inspection Officer: (1) The Department may, in
order to carry out monitoring of availability of the quality goods or services at
appropriate price for consumers by making market and supply system effective,
appoint Inspection Officer or designate any officer employee of the Government
of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level to act as Inspection Officer as
prescribed.
The qualification of the Inspection Officer appointed or designated
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
Functions, duties and powers of Inspection Officer: (1) If there is reasonable
ground to believe that the unsafe goods having adverse effect or sub-standard
goods are being produced or sold, or services have been provided, or any acts are
being done contrary to this Act and the rules framed under this Act, the Inspection
Officer may, by entering into such a place at any time as necessary, inspect, inquire
or search, arrest the person who commits such act and hold such a person in
detention for seven days with the permission of the case trying authority.
In the course of inspection, inquiry or search pursuant to sub-section
(1), necessary description, information or statement may be taken from the
producer, importer, carrier, hoarder, seller, service provider or other related
person.
(3) While carrying out inspection, investigation or search pursuant to subsection (2), if it seems unsafe, affected goods or goods having no quality are being
produced or sold and distributed, or service provided or activities are contrary to
this Act and the rules framed under this Act, the Inspection Officer may impose
restriction on producing or selling and distribution of such goods or providing
services for prescribed period by taking samples of such goods as prescribed.
A testing list of the goods or services shall have to be prepared as
prescribed for the purpose of carrying out market inspection or inquiry pursuant
to sub-section (1).
If it is not found to be in accordance with the testing list pursuant to
sub-section (4), the Inspection Officer may immediately impose the fine referred
to in Section 39 with restriction on the sale and distribution of such goods.
The report relating to the functions carried out by the Inspection
Officer pursuant to sub-section (2) shall have to be submitted to the Department
within seven days.
If a fine is imposed pursuant to sub-section (5) in the report pursuant
to Sub-section (6), report shall have to be prepared by specifying such details as
well.
If it seems appropriate to give any order immediately to the producer
or seller in course of inspection or inquiry, the Inspection Officer may give such
an order or do such other act as appropriate.
The procedures to be adopted by the Inspection Officer while
carrying out inspection, inquiry or search shall be as prescribed.
The Inspection Officer may, while carrying out inspection, inquiry
or search, if it seems that any legal action is required to be taken against any
producer, seller, send it to the Department by mentioning such details in the report
as well, or to other bodies concerned with the reason if needed.
The provisions relating to other functions, duties and powers of the
Inspection Officer and the implementation of the report furnished by the
Inspection Officer shall be as prescribed.
Testing of goods: (1) The Inspection Officer shall forward, immediately the
samples of goods taken for testing pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 33 to the
laboratory of the Government of Nepal or the laboratory accredited by the
Government of Nepal, as prescribed if the goods are of the nature of being instantly
rotten, overripe, and within twenty-four hours from the date of samples taken if
they are other goods.
The Inspection Officer shall, while forwarding samples to the
laboratory pursuant to sub-section (1), have to forward them by giving symbol
numbers to them.
If a false result is given or negligence is found to have been made
while testing the goods in the laboratory pursuant to sub-section (1), departmental
action shall be taken against such an employee.
To confiscate or destroy sub-standard goods: (1) If the goods are not found to
have the quality as prescribed while testing the samples of such goods forwarded
to the laboratory for testing pursuant to Section 34, such goods shall be confiscated
and shall, as required, be destroyed as prescribed.
When the goods are confiscated and destroyed pursuant to subsection (1), the producer, importer or seller shall have to bear the expenses for
confiscating or destroying such goods.
To make complaint: (1) If any goods or service provider performs any act against
the consumer interest or contrary to this Act or any rule framed under this Act,
any person who gets information of such matters may make a complaint in writing
or orally or even through electronic means to the Central Market Monitoring
Committee, Department or Inspection Officer, along with the information or proof
and evidence under his or her custody.
If the person who makes a complaint pursuant to sub-section (1)
wishes to keep his or her name confidential, the name of such a person shall have
to be kept confidential.
Other provisions relating to the complaint shall be as prescribed.
Action against person leaking information: (1) Departmental action shall be
taken against a public servant, who leaks the information of casual inspection or
the monitoring to be carried out regularly pursuant to Section 31, before such
inspection or monitoring takes place.
If information is leaked by a consumers’ organization or institution
of consumers or other person involved in the act referred to in sub-section (1), the
Director General of the Department shall impose a fine on such person,
representative or institution in accordance with the claimed amount as revealed
and from fifty thousand rupees up to one hundred thousand rupees if the claimed
amount in not set out, and such an organization or institution shall be included in
the black list for a period not exceeding three years.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Offences and Punishment
Offences deemed to have been committed: If anyone does, or causes to be done,
any of the following acts, he or she shall be deemed to have committed the offence:
failure to make the labeling pursuant to Section 6 or
mentioning false matters in the label,
failure of the producer, importer, carrier, hoarder, seller or
service provider to fulfill his or her liabilities or doing any
act to breach such liabilities under Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and 12 respectively,
failure of the seller to withdraw the goods within the deadline
prescribed or failure to give the goods equal to such price as
replacement pursuant to Section 14,
failure to keep the bills, invoices pursuant to Section 15,
doing, or causing to be done, the unfair trade activity
pursuant to clause (a), (g), (j) or (l) of sub-section (2) of

Section 16,
doing, or causing to be done, the unfair trade activity
pursuant to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (h), (i), (k), (m), (o)
and (p) of sub-section (2) of Section 16,
inflicting, or causing to be inflicted, adverse impact on
demand, supplies or price pursuant to clause (a) of subsection (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 17,
doing, or causing to be done, any act referred to in clause (b)
or (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 17,
doing, or causing to be done, any act contrary to Section 18,
selling, or causing to be sold, at the price higher than that
fixed by the Government of Nepal, contrary to sub-section
(3) of Section 19,
failure to do, or causing not to be done, any act referred to
in sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 20,
to sell or distribute goods or services contrary to the
standards determined under sub-section (1) of Section 21,
not to render assistance in the course of investigation,
inspection or monitoring under this Act pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 54.
To impose fine instantly: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 38,
if from the instantly received evidence, the producer, carrier, hoarder, importer,
seller of goods or service provider is found to have committed any offence, in the
course of market monitoring, inspection, inquiry, the Inspection Officer may
impose the fine as follows:
From five thousand to twenty thousand rupees if the offence
referred to in clause (d) of Section 38 is committed, or caused
to be committed,
From two hundred thousand to three hundred thousand
rupees if the offence referred to in clause (e) of Section 38 is
committed, or caused to be committed,
From fifty thousand rupees to one hundred thousand rupees
if the offence referred to in clause (h) of Section 38 is
committed or caused to be committed,
From fifty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees if the
offence referred to in clause (k) of Section 38 is committed,
or caused to be committed,
Up to twenty thousand rupees if the offence referred to in
clause (m) of Section 38 is committed, or caused to be
committed.
(2) If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) is committed frequently,
double fine shall be imposed for commission of the offence each time.
(3) The Inspection Officer shall have to inform the Department within three
days by revealing all the details including the cause to impose the fine instantly
and the amount charged thereof.
(4) The Inspection Officer may take the following actions against the
producer, carrier, hoarder, importer or seller of such goods who does not pay or
submit such fine within seven days from the date of the decision made to fine
instantly pursuant to sub-section (1):
keeping such goods sealed until the fine is paid,
withholding such other goods as well as to be produced,
transported, hoarded, imported or sold by the producer,
carrier, hoarder, importer or seller of such goods until the
fine is paid.
(5) If one is not satisfied with any act of the Inspection Officer under this
Section, an application may be made to the Director General of the Department
within seven days for the review of the matter.
(6) The Director General of the Department shall have to make a decision
in this regard within twenty-one days after examining whatever or whoever is to
be examined upon the application made against the decision by the Inspection
Officer pursuant to sub-section (5).
(7) While making an application for the review, fifty percent of the fine
imposed by the Inspection Officer shall have to be submitted as a cash deposit.
(8) The decision made by the Director General upon the application made
for the review shall be final.
(9) Other procedures to be adopted regarding the instant imposition of fine
by the Inspection Officer shall be as prescribed.
Punishment: (1) If any one commits, or causes to be committed, any of the
following acts which is deemed to be an offence under this Act, the Director
General of the Department may, according to the gravity of the offence, punish as
follows:
with imprisonment from three months to six months or fine
up to fifty thousand rupees or both penalties if the offence
referred to in clauses (a) and (c) of Section 38 is committed,
or caused to be committed,
with imprisonment from three months to one year or fine
from one hundred thousand rupees to three hundred thousand
rupees or both penalties if the offence referred to in clause
(i) of Section 38 is committed,
with imprisonment from three months to six months or fine
from fifty thousand rupees to one hundred thousand rupees
or both penalties if the offence referred to in clauses (j) and
(l) of Section 38 is committed.
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the decision made by the Director
General of the Department under sub-section (1) may appeal to the concerned
District Court within thirty-five days.
(3) For the following offences, punishment shall be as follows:
with imprisonment from two years to three years or fine from
three hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits, or causes to be
committed, the offence referred to in clause (b) of Section
with imprisonment from two years to five years or fine from
four hundred thousand to six hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits, or causes to be
committed, the offence referred to in clause (f) of Section 38,
with imprisonment from two years to three years or fine from
three hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits, or causes to be
committed, the offence referred to in clause (g) of Section
(4) A person who commits, or causes to be committed, any other act
contrary to this Act or the rules framed under this Act, Except for the acts under
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years or fine up to three hundred thousand rupees or both.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Consumer Court
Constitution of Consumer Court: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in order to
try and settle the cases other than the cases to be prosecuted pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 40 under this Act, constitute a Consumer Court as per
necessity, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) The venue and jurisdiction of the Consumer Court to be formed
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed in the same notice.
(3) The Consumer Court shall consist of the Chairperson and Members as
follows:
District Judge of the concerned district
designated by the Government of Nepal -Chairperson
Gazetted second class officer of Nepal Judicial
Service designated by the Government of Nepal -Member
Gazetted second class officer of the Government
of Nepal designated by the Government of Nepal -Member
(4) The Government of Nepal shall notify the designation of the
Chairperson or Members pursuant to sub-section (3) in the Nepal Gazette.
(5) The Government of Nepal shall consult the Judicial Council before the
District Judge is designated as the Chairperson of the Court, and of the Judicial
Service Commission before the officer of the Nepal Judicial Service is designated
as a Member pursuant to sub-section (3).
Application of jurisdiction of Court: (1) All the members shall collectively
exercise the jurisdiction of the Court.
Provided that the Bench in which at least one Member is present may carry
out procedural matters other than detention, and the Bench in which two Members
are present may take all other matters including detention.
(2) If unanimity is not reached while trying and settling a case in presence
of two Members, the case shall be settled as per the opinion of the Chairperson if
it is the Bench including the Chairperson in case it is the procedural matter of the
case.
(3) If it is the Bench in which the Chairperson is not present, it shall be as
per the opinion of the senior member based on the appointment. If it is the decision
or final order of the case, it shall be submitted to the Chairperson, and the opinion
supported by him or her shall be deemed to be the decision of the Court.
(4) The three Members shall collectively exercise the jurisdiction of the
Bench and majority opinion including that of the Chairperson shall be deemed to
be the decision of the Court.
(5) If all three Members have divergent opinion, the opinion of the
Chairperson prevails on the procedural matters and if it is on decision or final
order it shall be forwarded to the concerned High Court for the decision, by
specifying the reasons for not being able to issue a decision or final order.
(6) Hearing of the case pursuant to sub-section (5) shall be held in the single
Bench of the High Court and the decision or final order made by such a Bench
shall be deemed to be the decision or final order of the Court.
Contempt of Court: (1) The Court may initiate proceedings against the contempt
of court and if the act of contempt of court is found to be proved, the Court may
punish the offender with a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or an
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or with both.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the person
accused of contempt of court apologizes to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court
may not initiate the proceedings or excuse, reduce or change in punishment if the
punishment has already been determined or issue an order with effect of nonexecution of the sentence, if the conditions are complied with by the accused.
To make files or documents available: (1) If the Court or the Director General
of the Department orders any person, institution or office to submit or forward any
file, deed, document or any other proof as evidence in the course of the
proceedings of the case, such a person, institution or office shall have to submit or
forward such a file, deed, document or evidence, within the deadline determined
by the Court or the Director General of the Department.
(2) If it is obstructed to try, hear or settle the case, or if harassment or harm
or injury is caused to any party due to the reason that any person, institution or
office has not complied with the order pursuant to sub-section (1), the Court or
Director General of the Department may impose upon such a person or institution
or chief of office a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees each time.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if such a person
or institution or chief of office makes an application to the Court or the Director
General of the Department, within the time-limit determined by the Court or the
Director General, specifying the reason for not being able to abide by such order,
stating that fine should not be imposed, and if the statement of such application is
found to be reasonable, the Court or the Director General of the Department may
revoke such an order for imposition of the fine.
Appeal: An appeal may be made to the concerned High Court within thirty days
against the decision made by the Court under this Act.
Execution of decisions: If it is specified in the decision or order that the decision
or order is to be executed by any particular agency or official, the same agency or
official shall execute the decision or final order made by the Court under this Act,
and if it is not specified as such, it shall be executed by the concerned District
Court.
Dissolution of the Court: (1) The Government of Nepal may dissolve the Court
at any time by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) If the Court is dissolved pursuant to sub-section (1), the cases,
complaints or petitions remained pending at the time of dissolution after being
filed in such Court shall be ipso facto transferred to the concerned District Court
having territorial jurisdiction.
Special provision relating to action and finalization of case: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 41, the concerned District Court shall have the
authority to take action, hear or try the case under this Act until the Court is
constituted pursuant to this Section.
To table notice: The Government of Nepal shall have to table the notice published
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 41 or sub-section (1) of Section 47 in the
House of Representatives.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Compensation
Compensation may be claimed: If bodily, mental, financial, physical or other
kind of harm and injury is caused to any consumer by use of the goods or services
sold or distributed contrary to this Act, or damage is occurred as a result of
defective production of goods, the consumer himself or herself, or any consumer
association on his or her behalf, or the heir of the consumer if the consumer is
incompetent or has already died, may make a complaint to the Court for
compensation from the person who has produced, imported, hoarded, transported,
sold and distributed or provided such goods or services within six months from
the date of harm and injury caused.
To provide compensation: If the consumer is wounded by the use of the goods
or services sold, distributed or provided contrary to this Act, treatment expenses,
interim relief amount for the daily subsistence as per the family circumstances
throughout the treatment period and, if it is proved, in course of the investigation,
that the consumer has suffered, the consumer, or the heir as per law, if he or she
has died, shall entitled to get the amount of compensation from the concerned
producer, importer, hoarder, carrier, distributor or seller concerned on the basis of
such harm and injury.
To determine the standards of compensation: (1) The Court shall, while
determining the amount to be received by the consumer for compensation pursuant
to Section 51, have to determine it by taking following matters into consideration:
physical or mental suffering or pain caused to the victim, and
its severity,
estimated expenses to be made for treatment if curable
damage is caused,
depreciation caused in the capacity of the victim to generate
income due to the physical or mental damage,
victim’s age and his or her family responsibility, if incurable
type of physical or mental damage is caused,
number of victim’s family members who are dependent upon
him or her and minimum expenses required for the
maintenance of their livelihood if the victim has died,
such other matters, out of the matters claimed by the victims,
as found to be proper and appropriate,
financial and business condition of the producer, importer,
hoarder, seller and service provider.
(2) Other provisions relating to the determination of compensation pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-11
Miscellaneous
To provide essential goods or services at fair price: The Government of Nepal
may make provision to provide the essential foods or other goods or services
determined pursuant to Section 19 at a fair price as prescribed.
To extend support: (1) If the Department seeks support of local administration
and police in the course of implementing this Act, it shall be the duty of the local
administration and the police to extend such support.
(2) In the course of carrying out inquiry, monitoring or inspection under
this Act, it shall be the duty of all the concerned to extend necessary support to
the official carrying out such inquiry, monitoring or inspection or to the person,
team or Inspection Officer deputed under this Act.
Liability of institution: (1) If any business institution commits any act considered
as offence under this Act, the official who works in the capacity of the chief
administrative official of such an institution shall have the responsibility and
liability of such act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), such a person
shall not have to bear the liability regarding the offence occurred before he or she
became the chief administrative official.
Reward to informant: (1) After eventually settling the case filed upon being
investigated as per the information provided by the person who provides
information that the offence has been or is going to be committed, such a person
shall be rewarded with the ten percent of the claimed amount recovered or one
million rupees, whichever is the lesser.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no employee of
the Government of Nepal or corporate institution or the family member or
representative of the consumers’ organization or institution or employee deputed
for monitoring or their family member shall be entitled to the reward referred to
in this Section.
(3) The name, address of the informant pursuant to this Section and the
details of the information received from him or her shall be kept confidential.
No to bar to prosecute case under prevailing law: If any act which is deemed
as an offence under this Act is also deemed as an offence under other prevailing
law, this Act shall not bar to prosecute the case under such law.
Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall be the
plaintiff in the cases under this Act.
Investigation and filing of case: (1) The Inspection Officer shall carry out
investigation of the case relating to the offence under this Act.
(2) The Inspection Officer shall, after completing the investigation, have to
forward the matter to the concerned government attorney for the decision on
whether or not to institute the case, and if decision is made by the government
attorney to institute the case, the Inspection Officer shall file the case.
(3) While filing the case pursuant to sub-section (1), the Inspection Officer
shall file the case before the Director General of the Department in connection
with the case relating to the offence carrying the punishment referred to in subsection (1) of Section 40, and before the Court if the Court has been constituted
and before the District Court concerned if the Court has not been constituted in
connection with the case carrying punishment referred to in sub-section (3) of

Section 40.
To follow summary procedures: (1) While trying and settling the cases filed
under this Act, procedures shall have to be followed pursuant to the Summary
Procedures Act, 2028 (1972).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), general
procedures shall have to be followed in the cases carrying the sentence of
imprisonment for more than three years.
Saving of act done in good faith: The Consumer Protection Council, Central
Monitoring Committee, Local Market Monitoring Committee, Inspection Officer
or any employee of the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local
Level shall not be personally responsible for any act done by him or her in good
faith while performing his or her duties under this Act or the rules framed under
this Act.
To be in accordance with this Act: The matters contained in this Act shall be in
accordance with this Act and other matters shall be in accordance with the
prevailing law.
Power to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules
in order to implement this Act.
(2) The Provincial Government may frame necessary rules in order to make
the activities relating to market monitoring systematic and effective pursuant to

Section 27.
Power to frame and enforce directives, procedures or standards: (1) The
Ministry may, in order to implement this Act and the rules framed by the
Government of Nepal under this Act, frame and enforce directives, procedures or
standards as necessary.
(2) The concerned Rural Municipality or Municipality may, in order to
make the activities relating to market monitoring systematic and effective pursuant
to Section 28, frame and enforce necessary directives and procedures.
Repeal and Saving: (1) The Consumer Protection Act, 2054 (1998) is hereby
repealed.
(2) The acts and actions performed under the Act pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be deemed to have been performed under this Act.

===== SOURCE: The Income Tax Act, (2058 ).pdf =====

(Unofficial Translation)
The Income Tax Act, 2058 (2002)
Date of Royal Assent and Publication:
2058.12.19 (1 April 2002)
Amending Acts:
Date of Authentication and
Publication
1.Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2063(2006)
2063.06.28 (14 October 2006)
2.The Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal
Laws Amendment Act, 2066(2010)1
2066.10.07 (21 January 2010)
3.Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act,2072(2016)
2072.11.13 (25 February 2016)
4. The Financial Act, 2075(2018)
2075. 03.32 (16 July 2018)
5.Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2075(2019)
2075.11.19 (03 March 2019)
6.The Financial Act, 2076 (2019)
2076.03.30 (15 July 2019)
7.The Financial Act, 2077 (2020)
2077.03.15 (29 June 2020)
Act No. 22 of the year 2058(2002)
2.....................
An Act Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Income Tax
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make timely the laws relating to income tax by
amending and consolidating them in order to enhance revenuemobilization by making the
process of collecting revenue effective for the economic development of the country;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by Parliament in the first year of reign of His Majesty King
Gyanendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.
1This Act came into force on 2065.02.15 (28 May 2008).
2Deleted by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2006 (2010).
(Unofficial Translation)
Chapter-I
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Income Tax Act, 2058
(2002)."
(2) This Act shall come into force throughout3............ Nepal and shall also apply to
residents residing wherever outside4............ Nepal
(3)This Act shall come into force immediately.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires in this Act, -
(a) "Person withholding advance tax" means a person with a duty to withhold advance tax
pursuant to Chapter-17 in making payments for employment, investment return,
service charge and contract or agreement, as well.
(b) "Officer" means the Director General, Deputy Director General, Chief Tax
Administrator, Director, Chief Tax Officer, Tax Officer and other Officers in the
Department, as referred to in Section 72.
(c) "Payment from which tax is withheld finally" means any dividend, rent, profit,
interest and payment from which tax has to be withheld made to the non-resident
person, as referred to in Section 92.
(d) "Retirement fund" means an entity established with the sole objective to accept
retirement contribution fund for making retirement payments from the fund to the
entity's beneficiary individuals or their dependents, and invest such funds.
(e) "Retirement payment" means any payment made to the following person:
(1) Payment made to an individual where such person has got retirement, or
(2) Payment to the dependent of an individual where suchperson has died.
(f) "Retirement contribution fund" means any payment made to a retirement fund for
provisions of retirement payment or for future provisions thereof.
(g) "Incapacitated person" means a person who is not capable of making his or her
dealings because of physical or mental illness.
(h)5 "Income" means an income earned by any person from employment, profession,
investment or windfall gain and the term also includes the total amount of that income
calculated in accordance with this Act.
3Deleted by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066(2010).
4Deleted,by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066(2010).
5Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(hl)6 "Windfall gain" means a gain obtained by means of lottery, gift, prize, tips, share of
earning in a game (Jitauri) or any other gain acquired incidentally.
(i) "Income year" means a period from the first day of Shrawan (15 July) of any year to
the last day of Ashad (14 July) of the next year.
(j) "Gift" means any payment made without any consideration or in the case of any
payment with consideration, where the market value of payment exceeds the market
value of consideration, payment to the extent of such excess.
(k) "Debt liability" means the liability equivalent to the debt claim.
(l) "Debt claim" means the right of any person to receive payment from another person,
and the term also includes the right of any person to have repaid a loan lent by such
person to another person, the right to receive deposits made in a bank and financial
institution, to receive sums to which such person is entitled and to receive moneys
from the sale of debentures, bills of exchange, bonds, rights under annuities, financial
lease and installments.
(m) "Company" means any company incorporated under the prevailing company law, and
for the purpose of tax the following institutions shall also be treated as if they were
companies:
(1) Any corporate body established under the laws in force;
(2) Any unincorporated union, board, association or society or sole proprietorship
whether incorporated or not and any group of persons or trust except a
partnership;
(3)Any partnership firm, retirement fund, cooperative institution, unit trust, joint
venture, consisting of twenty or more partners whether registered or not under the
law in force;
(4) Any foreign company;
(5) Any other foreign institution as specified by the Director General.
(n) "Tax" means the tax chargeable under this Act, and thisterm includes the following
payments:
(1)The expenditures referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (8) of Section 104 as
incurred by the Department for any claim in respect of, and auction sale of, the
property in which the tax is due and outstanding,
(2)7 The amount payable by the person withholding advance tax or the person subject
to tax withholding under Section 90 or the amount payable by the person making
payment in installment under Section 94 or the amount payable by the person
withholding advance tax under Section 95A. or the amount payable after the tax
assessment under Sections 99, 100 and 101,
6Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
7Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(3) The amount payable to the Department in respect of tax liability of the third party
under sub-section (2) of Section 107, sub-section (3) or (4) of Section 108, subsection (1) of Section 109, sub-section (1) of Section 110,
(4) The amount referred to in Chapter-22 payable for a feeand interest, and
(5) The amount of fine referred to in Section 129 required to be paid as per the order
of the Department.
(o) "Person subject to tax withholding" means any person who receives payment or has
the right to receive payment by withholding tax under Chapter-17 in making payment
for employment, investment return, service fee or contract or agreement.
(p)"Tax assessment" means the assessment of tax to be made underthis act and this term
includes the assessment of a fee and interest under Section 122.
Provided that this term does not mean the previous tax assessment substituted
by the amended tax assessment under Section 101.
(p1)8"Transaction" means a transaction equal to the total amount included pursuant to

Section 7, 8 or 9 for the purpose of calculation of income of employment, business or
investment in any income year.
(q) "Non-resident person" means any person save the resident person.
(r)9 9"Non-business taxable assets" means any land, building and interest or security in
any entity except the following properties:
(1) Business assets, depreciable assets or stocks-in-trade,
(2) A private building owned by an individual in the following situation:
(a) Being under ownership for a continuous period of ten years or more, and
(b) Where that person has resided for a total period of ten years or more
continuously or at several times,
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, "private building" means building and
the land occupied by the building or one Ropani of land whichever is lesser.
(3) Any interest of any beneficiary in retirement fund,
(4) A land, land with building and private building belonging toand disposed of by
any individual for a value less than ten million rupees, or
(5)An asset disposed ofby way of transfer in any manner other than the purchase and
sale within three generations.
(s)10 "Organization entitled to enjoy exemption" means the following entity:
8Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
9Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(1) The following entities registered in the Department as organizations entitled to
enjoy exemption:
(a) a social, religious, educational or benevolent organization of public nature
established with nonprofit motive,
(b) an amateur sports organization so formed with a view to promoting social or
sports related facilities that the organization or its members does not derive
profits,
(2) A political party registered in the Election Commission,
Provided that if any person has derived any benefit from the property of that
organization and the monies obtained from that organization except in making
payment for the property or the service provided by any person to that
organization or in discharging functions in consonance with the objective of the
organization entitled to exemption, tax exemption shall not be granted.
(t) "Trust" means an arrangement whereby a trustee holds any property.
Provided that this term does not include a partnership, corporate body or
organization referred to in sub-clause (3) of clause (m).
(u) "Trustee" means an individual, trust (Guthi) or other body corporate who, individually
or jointly with other individual, trust (Guthi) or corporate body, holds a property in
trust, and the term also includes the following person:
(1) The operator or administrator of the assets of a deceased,
(2) A liquidator, recipient or trustee,
(3) Any person who protects, directs, controls or manages the assets of an
incapacitated person in personal or official capacity,
(4) Any person who manages the assets under a private enterprise or similar other
enterprise, and
(5)Any other person in a position similar to that of the person as referred to in
clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4).
(v) "Long-term contract" means a contract referred to in Section 26 of which validity
period is more than twelve months.
(w) "Relative" means an individual's husband, wife, son, daughter (adopted son, daughter
as well), father, mother, grand-father, grand-mother, elder brother, younger brother,
sister-in-law, daughter-in-law, elder sister, younger sister, father-in-law, mother-inlaw, brother-in-law, elder brother-in-law, wife's sister, uncle, aunt, nephew, niece,
grand-son and granddaughter.
(x) "Entity" means the following organization or body:
10Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(1) A partnership, trust or company,
(2)11Rural Municipality, Municipality or District Coordination committee,
(3)12 Govemment of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level,
(4) Any foreign government or provincial or local government under that
government or a public international organization established by any treaty, or
(5) A permanent establishment of the organization or body referred to in clauses (1),
(2) (3) and ( 4)13, which is not situated in a country of which it is a resident.
(y) "Interest in entity" means and includes the contingent right to receive income or
capital of any entity.
(z) "Disposal" means a disposal inclusive of the sale or transfer of any property or
liability as mentioned in Section 40.
(aa) "Vested ownership" means the following ownership:
(1) In the case of any entity, ownership created on the basis of the interest which any
individual or any entity in which an individual has no interest has in that entity
directly or indirectly through one or more interposed entities, or
(2) In the case of the assets owned by any entity, ownership of the assets as
determined in proportion to the ownership of the persons who have vested
ownership in that entity.
(ab) "Lease" means the provisional right of any person to enjoy or use any property
except movable property belonging to another person, and the term also includes a
license, rent agreement, trenches, royalty agreement or right of a lessee/ tenant.
(ac) "Individual" means an individual, and, for the purposes of this Act this term also
includes a sole proprietorship owned by an individual, whether registered or not, and
a spouse so selected under Section 50 as to be considered as the single individual.
(ad) "Payment for natural resources" means an amount of any of the following payments:
(1)14Amounts received for having right to extract water, minerals or other living and
non-living resources from the earth, or
(2)15 Amounts calculated on the basis of the quantity or value of living or non-living
resources of the natural resources and minerals extracted from the earth, in full or
in part.
11Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
12Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
13Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
14Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
15Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(ae) "Market value" means ordinary transaction value of any property or service in the
ordinary course of trade between unrelated persons in respect of such property or
service.
(af)16"Rent" means a premium received for the house rent as well asfor the lease of a
tangible property and payment for the provision of that lease.
Provided that this term does not include any payment made for natural resources or
amount received by the individual as a rent of house except for private/sole firm.
(ag) "Payment" means the following activities:
(1) If the money or property owned by any one person is transferred to another
person and the liability of any other person is transferred to that person,
(2) If the ownership over any property created by any person devolves on another
person after the creation of thatproperty or if any person bears the onus of liability
of another person,
(3) If any person delivers service to another person,
(4) If any person uses any property owned by another person or such property is
available for such use.
(ah) "Distribution of profit" means the distribution of profits of any entity made pursuant
to Section 53, including the capitalization of profits.
(ai) "Unit trust" means a trust to be divided on the basis fixed with the number of the units
holding the right of the persons entitled to participate in income or capital, with a
provision that the trustee holds property for the benefits of at least twenty persons.
(aj) "Employment" means any kind of past, present or future employment.
(ak) "Royalty" means any payment made under the lease of any intangible property, and
the term also includes any payment made for the following purpose:
(1) To use or have the right to use a copyright, patent, design, model, plan, secret
formula or process or trademark,
(2) To render technical know-how,
(3) To provide the right to use any motion picture film, video tape, sound recording
or similar other means and 17to use or render industrial, business or scientific
experience,
(4)To render any assistance m a manner to be ancillary to the matters referred to in
clauses ( 1 ), (2), or (3 ), or
16Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
17Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(5) To have full or partial restrictions on the matters referred to in (1 ), (2), or (3) or
Provided that the term does not mean any payment made for natural resources.
(al)18"Investment" means the act of holding one or more properties or investing such
properties, except with the followings:
(l) Holding any property used by the owner inpersonal use, or
(2) Employment or occupation.
Provided that the act of holding any non-business taxable assets is considered
as investment.
(am) "Investment insurance" means any of the following insurance:
(1) An insurance against the death of the insured or of the associated person of the
insured,
(2) An insurance against personal injuries of the insured or his associated person or
against any event leading to incapacity in any particular manner,
Provided that the validity period of the insurance contract shall be at least five
years or the contract shall be without any validity period and the contract is so made
that it cannot be terminated by the insurer prior to expiration of a period of five years
except in exceptional circumstances.
(3) An insurance so made that any money or series of moneys are paid to the insured
in the future,
(4) Reinsurance of the insurance referred to in clause (1), (2) or (3), or
(5) Reinsurance of the reinsurance referred to in clause (4).
(an) "Dividend" means the distribution to be made by an entity.
(ao) "Resident person" means the following person 111 respect of any income year:
(1) In respect of an individual,
(a) Whose normal abode is in Nepal,
(b) Who has resided in Nepal for 183 days or more during a continuous period of
365 days19..........or
(c) Who is deputed by the Government of Nepal to a foreign country in any time
of the income year,
(2) A partnership firm,
18Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
19Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(3) In respect of a trust, such trust
(a) Which is established in Nepal,
(b) The trustee of which is a resident person in an income year20,or
(c) Which is controlled by a resident person or by a group of persons comprising
such a person, directly or through one or more interposed entities,
(4) In respect of a company, such company,
(a) Which is incorporated under the law of Nepal21, or
(b) Management of which has been effective in Nepal in any income year.
(4a)22 Government of Nepal or Provincial Government,
(5)23 Rural Municipality, Municipality, or District Coordination Committee,
(6) In respect of an entity of any foreign government or provincial24 or local
government under that government, such entity,
(a) Which is established under the laws of Nepal, or
(b) Management of which is effective in Nepal in any income year.
(7) An organization or entity established under any treaty or agreement, and
(8) A foreign permanent establishment of a nonresident person situated in Nepal.
(ap) "Person" means an individual or entity.
(aq) "Manager" means any person involved m making managerial decisions of any entity,
and the term also includes a trustee of any trust and a person having ownership in a
foreign permanent establishment.
(ar) "Occupation" means any kind of industry, business, profession or business
transactions of similar other nature, and the term also includes past, present or future
occupations of similar type.
Provided that this term does not include employment.
(as) "Interest" means the following payment or profit:
(1) Payment under debt liability except the principal,
20Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
21Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
22Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
23Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
24Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2)Profit made from concession, 25concession under credit liability, premium,
alteration payment or from similar payment, and
(3) The amounts referred to in Section 32 receivable as an interest out of the payment
to be made by a person who acquires any property under annuities or installment
sale or of the payment made to any person for the use of any property under a
financial lease.
(at) "Stock-in-trade" means the property owned by any person and26... to be sold in the
course of regular business carried on by such person, the property in work-in-progress
and the inventory of materials to be incorporated in the property.
Provided that this term does not include a property held in foreign currency.
(au) "Business asset" means any property used in any occupation.
Provided that this term does not mean stock-in-trade or depreciable assets of
the occupation.
(av) "Distribution" means a distribution to be made by any entity as referred to in Section
(av1)27 "Electronic means" means computer, fax, email, internet, electronic cash machine
and fiscal printer, and this term also includes other approved means as specified by
the Department.
(aw) "Income sent abroad" means an income required to be sent abroad by a foreign
permanent establishment of a non-resident person situated in Nepal as referred to in

Section 68, which has been sent abroad through a bank or paid in any other manner.
(ax) "Foreign income tax" means a foreign income tax referred to in sub-section (8) of

Section 69 levied by any foreign country.
(ay) "Foreign permanent establishment" means an entity referred to in28sub-clause (5) of
clause (x).
(az) "Department' means the Inland Revenue Department.
(aaa) "Property held in foreign currency" means any property held in a foreign currency
other than Nepalese rupees.
(aab) "Permanent establishment" means a place where any person carries on a business
fully or partly, and the term includes the following place:
(1) A place where any person carries on a business fully or partly, through any agent
except a general agent who acts independently in the ordinary course of carrying
on business,
25Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
26Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
27Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
28Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) A place where any person's main equipment or main machinery is situated or
used or installed,
(3) One or more than one place in any country where any person has delivered
technical, professional or consultancy service through an employee or in any other
manner for more than ninety days at one or several times in a period of any twelve
months, or
(4) A place where any person ts involved in a construction, installation or
establishment project andhas carried out supervisory works of that project for a
period of ninety days or more.
(aac) "Property" means a tangible or intangible property of any kind, and the term also
includes currency, good-will, technological knowledge, assets, any person's
ownership or interest in a foreign branch, a right to make income or acquire income
in the future and any part of such property.
(aad) "Associated person" means any one or more than one person or group of persons
who act as per the intention of each other, and the term also includes the following
persons:
(1) An individual and relative of that person or anyperson or a partner of that person,
(2) A foreign permanent establishment and a person having ownership in that
establishment, and
(3) Any entity which by itself or jointly with any other person related with it or with
an assisting entity or any other person or entity related with such assisting entity
controls fifty percent or more of the income, capital or voting right of any entity or
derives benefits therefrom.
Provided that the following person shall not be an associated person:
(1) An employee,
(2) A person specified by the Department as a non-associated person.
(aad1)29 "Adjusted taxable income" means the taxable income of any person for any
income year calculated without reducing any amount under Section 12 or without
any deduction under sub-section (2) of Section 14, Section 17orl8.
(aae) "Partnership" means a firm consisting of less than twenty partners, whether
registered under the law in force or not.
Provided that this term does not include a sole proprietorship or joint venture,
whetherregistered or not.
(aaf) "General insurance" means an insurance other than investment insurance.
(aag) "General interest rate" means the rate of interest by fifteen percent per annum.
29Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(aah) "Approved retirement fund" means a retirement fund having obtained approval from
the Department pursuant to sub-section ( 1) of Section 63.
(aai) "Service charge" means any charge paid to any person, according to the market
value, for the service rendered by such a person, and the term also includes any
commission, meeting allowance, management fee or technical service charge.
(aaj) "Shareholder" means a beneficiary of any company.
(aak) "Depreciable property" means a property, which is used in any business or
investment for earning income, and declines in value because of wear and tear,being
old or passage of time.
Provided that the term does not mean stock-in-trade.
(aal) "Beneficiary" means a person who has an interest 30referred to in clause (y) in any
entity.
(aam) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the Rules
framed under this Act.

Chapter-2
Tax Bases
3. Tax to be levied: Tax shall be levied on each of the following persons in each income year
and be collected pursuant to this Act:
(a) A person who has taxable income in any income year,
(b) A non-resident person's foreign permanent establishment situated in Nepal, which
sends income of any income year pursuant to sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section
68, and
(c) A person who receives payment final tax withholding in any income year.
4. Computation and rate of tax:32(l) The amount of tax required to be paid by any person
referred to in Section 3 for any income year shall be equal to the total amount of tax
required to be paid by such person in the capacity of any one person or more than one
person mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of that Section.
(2) In computing the tax required to be paid by any person referred toin clause (a) of

Section 3, it shall be computed by applying the related rates mentioned in schedule-I to
the taxable income of that person. In so computing the tax, it shall be computed by
30Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
31Repealed by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066(2010)
32Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
deducting the amount that is adjustable in tax, and claimed by that person pursuant to

Section 51 or 71 33 or both the Sections.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the tax payable by a
resident individual referred to in clause (a) of Section 3, who has fulfilled all of the
following requirements, shall be equal to the total amount of tax deducted pursuant to

Section 87 from the payments made by the employer to such an individual in that income
year:
(a)Only the income of any employment having source in Nepal is included in the
income of that income year,
(b) All employers have become non-resident persons in that income year and there
is only one employer at one time, and
(c)34The employer has made a claim for the adjustment of tax for the medical
expenses and retirement contribution paid by him and not of the expenses for
donation under Section 12.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the tax payable in any
income year by a resident individual referred to in clause (a) of Section 3, who has
fulfilled all of the following requirements, shall be equal to the amount mentioned in
sub-section (7) of Section ( l) of Schedule -1:
(a) That person has only income earned from his business having source in Nepal
in that income year,
(al)35 Not claimed for tax adjustment for medical expenses under Section 51 and
for advance tax deduction under Section 93,
(b)36The income earned from the business that does not exceed two hundred
thousand rupees and turnover of the business that does not exceed two million
rupees,
(c) That person has so opted that this provision is applicable in that income year,
(d) 37Not registered in value-added tax.
(4a)38 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the tax to be paid by
an individual referred to in clause (a) of Section 3 who has meet the following
conditions on the basis of transaction in any income year shall be equal to the amount
calculated according to the rate prescribed in sub-section ( 17) of Section 1 of
Schedule I :
33Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
34Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
35Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
36Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
37Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
38Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) that person has income only from the source of occupation in Nepal in that
income year,
(b) the annual turnover of the occupation is more than twenty lakh rupees and less
than fifty lakh rupees,
(c) not registered in value added tax, and
(d) income not for consultancy and expertise service to be provided by doctor,
engineer, chartered accountant, legal professional, sportsperson, actor,
consultant like individuals.
(5)In computing the tax required to be paid by any foreign permanent
establishment referred to in clause (b) of Section 3, it shall be computed by applying
the related rates mentioned in sub-section (6) of Section 2 of Schedule-I to the income
sent abroad by such establishment in that income year.
(6) The amount of tax required to be paid by the person referred to in clause ( c) of

Section 3 shall be equal to the total amount computed by applying the rates mentioned
in 39Sections 87, 88, 88A.and 89 to the amount of each payment liable to final tax
deduction received by that person in that income year.
5. Taxable income and classification of income headings: The taxable income of any person
in any income year shall be equal to the amount computed by subtracting the amount, if
any, claimed pursuant to 40Sections 12 12A., 12B. 63 or all these Sections from the grand
total amount of assessable income of each of the following income headings in that
income year:
(a) Business,
(b) Employment,.........41 .
(c) 42Investment, and
(d)43 Windfall gain.
6.44Assessable income: Subject to this Act, the following incomes earned by any person for
any business, employment, investment or windfall gain in any income year shall be
considered assessable income:
(a) Income earned by any resident person from his employment, business or
investment in that income year irrespective of the place of his source of
income, and
39Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
40Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
41Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
42Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
43Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
44Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Income earned in that income year by any non-resident person from
employment, business or investment having income source in Nepal.
Provided that the assessable income shall not include any income exempted
from tax pursuant to Section 11 or 64.

Chapter-3
Computation of Tax
7. Computation of income from business: (1) The profits andbenefits made by any person in
any year from any business shall be 45the income of that business of that person in that
income year.
(2) In computing the profits and benefits earned by any person from the business in
any income year, it shall be computed so as to include the following amounts received by
that person within that year:
(a) Service charge,
(b) Amount obtained from the disposal of stock-in-trade,
(c) Net profit derived from the business assets or business liability of any person
computed pursuant to Chapter-8,
(d) Amount considered to have been derived pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section
(2) of Section 4 of Schedule-Z from the disposal of depreciable property of the
business,
(e) Gift received from any person in respect of the business,
(f) Amount received for having accepted any restriction in respect of the
operation of the business,
(g) Notwithstanding that the amount received by any person is of such nature that
it is included in income from investment, the amount received by such a
person being directly related with his business, and
(h) Other amounts liable to be included pursuant to Chapter-6 or 7 or Section 56
or 60.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the amounts deductible
under Sections 10, 54 and 69 and payments from which tax is withheld finally may not
be included in computing the profits and benefits derived from the operation of business.
8. Computation of income earned from employment: (1) The remuneration derived by any
individual from employment in any income year shall be computed as the income earned
by that person in that year.
45Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The following payments made by an employer to an individual in any income year
shall be included in computing the remuneration earned by such individual from
employment in that income year:
(a) Amount for wages, salary, leave, amount for overtime work, fee, commission,
prize, gift, bonus, and payment for other facilities,
(b) Payment for any personal allowance including amount for dear allowance,
subsistence allowance, entertainment and transport allowance,
(c) Payment received for settlement of or reimbursement of expenses incurred by
him or his associated person for personal purpose,
(d) Payment made for having given consent to any terms of employment,
(e) Payment made for termination, loss of employment, or for compulsory
retirement,
(f) Retirement payment and retirement contribution including the amount
deposited by the employer for that employee in the retirement fund,
(g) Other payments made in respect of employment, and
(h) Other amounts required to be included pursuant to Chapter-6 or 7.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the following matters need
not be included in computing the remuneration earned by any individual from
employment:
(a) The amounts deductible under Sections 10 and payment from which tax is
withheld finally,
(b) Food and tiffin provided by the employer to the employee at the work site in a
manner that it is available to all employees on the same terms,
(c) The settlement or reimbursement of the following expenditure incurred by any
employee:
(1) The expenditure fulfils the business purpose of the employer, or
(2) The expenditure exempted or to be exempted in the computation of the
income earned from investment.
(d) Payment of such petty amounts of which accounts are impracticable to be
maintained or difficult to be maintained administratively as prescribed.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "payment" means the payment:
(a) made by the employer,
(b) made by the associated person of the employer, and
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) made by any third person as referred to in the agreement made with the
employer or his associated person.
9. Computation of income earned from investment: (1) The profits and benefits derived by
any person from investment in any income year 46shall be the income earned by that
person from investment in that year.
(2) The following amounts received by any person in any income year shall be
included in computing the profits and benefits derived by that person from investment in
that income year:
(a) Dividend, interest derived from that investment, payment for natural
resources, rent, royalty, profit from investment insurance, profit from
interest in a retirement fund which has not got approval pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 63 or retirement payment made from the approved
retirement fund,
(b) Net profits derived from the disposal of non-business taxable assets of the
investment of that person, computed pursuant to Chapter-8,
(c) If, in disposing the depreciable property of the investment made by that
person, the incomings to be received exceed the remaining
valuecomprising the outgoings made for the property of the group of
depreciable property pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 4
of Schedule2, the excess amount,
(d) Gift received by that person in respect of investment,
(e) Retirement payment made in respect of that investment and retirement
contribution including the amount deposited in the retirement fund for that
person,
(f) Amounts received for having accepted any restriction in respect of
investment, and
(g) Other amounts required to be included pursuant to Chapter-6 or 7 or

Section 56.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), thefollowing matters
shall not be included in computing profits and benefits derived by any person from
investment:
(a) The amounts deductible under Sections 10, 54 and 69 and payment from
which tax is withheld finally, and
(b) The amounts to be included in computing income by that person from
employment or business.
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-4
Exemptible Amounts and Other Exemptions
10. Exemptible amounts: The following amounts shall be exempted from tax:
(a) Amount exempted from tax granted to any person entitled to tax exemption
facility as provided for in a bilateral or multilateral 47treaty or agreement
concluded between the Government of Nepal and any foreign country or
international organization,
(b) Amount received by any individual for doing employment in the
governmental service of a foreign country,
Provided that-
(1) The person has to be a resident or non-resident person only because of
doing employment, and
(2) Such amounts have to be paid from the governmental fund of that
country.
(c) Amount received by an individual referred to in clause (b) who is not a
citizen of Nepal or by his nearest family member from the governmental
fund of a foreign country,
(d) Amount received by a non-Nepalese citizen appointed in the service of
The Government of Nepal under the term and condition of tax exemption,
(e) 48All kinds of allowances provided by the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government or Local Level as social security,
(f) Amounts received as gift, inheritance or scholarship except the amounts
required to be included in computing income pursuant to Section 7, 8 or 9,
(g) Amounts received by an organization entitled to exemption for the
following:
(1) Donation, gift,
(2) Other contributions directly related with an organization entitled to
exemption as referred to in clause ( d) of Section 2 without having
consideration or without hoping for such contribution, or
(3)49..................
47Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
48Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(h) Amount received for pension by a Nepalese citizen having retired from the
military or police service of a foreign country from the governmental fund
of that country,
(i) 50Any type of income of the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government
or Local Level,
(j) 51Amounts earned by Nepal Rastra Bank in pursuance of itsobjective.
(k)52 Amounts earned by water supply and sanitation consumer organization
registered as per Water Resources Act 2049, in pursuance of its objective.
11. Professional exemptions and facilities: (1) No tax shall be levied on an income earned by
carrying on an agricultural business by getting one registered as a firm, company,
partnership and corporate body and on agricultural income other than that earned from an
agricultural business in the land as referred to in clauses (d) and ( e) of Section 12 of the
Act Relating to Land, 2021(1964).
(2)53No tax shall be levied on the income of a cooperative organization and saving
and credit cooperative organization or institution, which has been registered and operated
under the Cooperatives Act, 2074 (2018) and which carries on professional forest related
business like forest and agricultural industry as agricultural or forest based industries such
as sericulture and silk production, fruits farming, production and fruits processing, animal
husbandry, dairy industry, poultry farming, fishery, tea gardening and processing, coffee
farming and processing, herbiculture and herb processing, vegetable seeds farming, bee
keeping, honey production, rubber farming, leasehold forestry, agro-forestry etc., cold
storage established for the storage of vegetables, agro-seeds, pesticides, fertilizers and
agricultural inputs ( except those operated with mechanical power), and cooperative
.....54in the area of the Rural Municipality or income of the federation. No tax shall also be
levied on the dividends distributed by such organization or institution.
(2a)55 No tax shall be levied in interest income up to twenty five thousand rupees per
year if it is generated from the deposits in a micro financial institution, rural development
bank, postal saving bank and cooperative pursuant to sub-section (2).
(2b)56 Exemption from tax on the income earned by a special industry in full
operation throughout the year in any income year shall be as follows:
(a) by one-thirds of the tax if tax is levied at the rate of thirty percent on the
income of a resident individual,
(b) by twenty percent on tax leviable on the income of an entity,
49Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
50Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
51Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
52Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
53Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
54Deleted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
55Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
56Inserted by the Financial Act, 2076(2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) a person having enjoyed the facility under clause (a) or (b) shall also be
entitled to such exemption and facility if the person is eligible to enjoy
another tax exemption facility under this Section.
(3)57 Tax shall be levied as follows on the income earned by any person from a
special industry and information technology industry in any income year:
(a) If the person gives direct employment to hundred or more Nepali citizens
throughout the year, ninety percent of the rate of tax leviable on the
income of that year, if the person gives direct employment to three
hundred or more Nepali citizens throughout the year, eighty percent of the
rate of tax leviable on the income of that year, if the person gives direct
employment to five hundred or more Nepali citizens throughout the year,
seventy-five percent of the rate of tax leviable on the income of that year,
if the person gives direct employment to one thousand or more Nepali
citizens throughout the year, seventy percent of the rate of tax leviable on
the income of that year,
Provided that additional ten percent exemption shall be provided if the
person gives direct employment to one hundred hundred or more Nepali
citizens throughout the year including thirty-three percent from among
women, Dalits or persons with disability.
(b)58 If a special industry has been operated in remote, undeveloped and less
developed areas, respectively ten, twenty and thirty percent of the tax
leviable on income of the years for up to 10 years after industry starts its
business production or transaction.
(c) If an industry is established with an investment of more than one thousand
million rupees and providing direct employment to more than five
hundred, such special industry and tourism industry (except Casino) shall
be provided with full income tax exemption for five years from the date of
starting of its transaction and fifty percent for the three years afterwards,
Provided that if the industry in operation at present increases its installed
capacity at least by twenty-five percent and making its capital two thousand
million rupees and provided direct employment to more than three hundred,
income tax exemption shall be provided in the income so earned from
capacity enhancement for five years and fifty percent shall be exempted in
tax for the three years afterwards.
(3a)59The exemptions shall be made from the income tax in income of the
industry established in special economic zone and tax on dividends distributed by
such industry as follows:
(a) The industry established in special economic zones mountainous district
and hilly district as specified by the Government of Nepal, such special
57Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
58Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
59Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
industry shall be provided with hundred percent income tax exemptions for
ten years from the date of starting of its transaction and fifty percent
afterwards,
(b) The industry established in special economic zones in other area except
that mentioned in clause (a) by the Government of Nepal, such industry
shall be provided with hundred percent income tax60 exemptions for five
years from the date of starting of its transaction and fifty percent
afterward,
(c) Dividends distributed by the industry established in special economic
zone, tax exemptions on such dividends shall be hundred percent for five
years from the date of starting of its transaction and fifty percent for three
years afterwards,
(d) Income by the foreign investors from foreign technology or management
service charge or royalty in the industry established in special economic
zone, fifty percent in such income tax
(3b)61 If a person having transaction in exploration and excavation of minerals,
petroleum product, natural gas and fuel continues the commercial transaction till
Chaitra of 2080 (mid-April of 2024), the whole income tax shall be exempted for the
first seven years from the date of operation of its transaction and fifty percent
exemption shall be granted for three years afterwards.
(3c)62The industry related to software development, data processing, cyber
cafe, digital mapping established in the zoological, geological, biotech parkoperation
and technology park63 specified by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette shall have fifty percent exemption from income tax.
(3d)64 The licensed person or entity commencing commercial production,
transmission or distribution of hydropower till Chaitra of 2080 (mid-March of 2024)
shall be provided full income tax exemption for the first ten years after starting
commercial production,65 and fifty percent exemption for another five years
afterwards. Such facility shall also be available to electricity generated from solar,
wind and biological substance.
Provided that in the case of the license holder that has already commenced
commercial production at the time of commencement of this sub-section, the
provision prevailing at the time of issuance of the license shall apply.
(3e)66 Tax exemption on income earned from export in any income year from
a source in Nepal shall be as follows:
60Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
61Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
62Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
63Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
64Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
65Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
66Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) if tax is chargeable at the rate of twenty percent on an income of an
individual resident, twenty-five percent of that tax and if thirty percent is
taxable, fifty percent of that tax,
(b) twenty percent of tax leviable on the income of an entity,
(c) additional twenty-five percent of the tax on income earned from export of
goods produced by a production-based industry, after deduction of the
exemption under clause (a) or (b).
(3f) 67 In the case of income earned by any entity by doing any of the
following, tax shall be *exempted until 10 years from the operation of business
transaction are as follows:
(a) forty percent, in the case of operation of a tram or trolley bus,
(b) forty percent, in the case of build and operation of a ropeway, cable car or
sky bridge,
(c) fifty percent, in the case of construction and operation of road, bridge,
tunnel road, tunnel, railway and airport.
(d) .......................
(e) ................
(3g)68The production based, tourism service, hydropower generation,
distribution and transmission entities enlisted in securities market and the entities
mentioned in sub-section (3c) of Section 11 shall have fifteen percent exemption form
the payable tax.
(3h)69The industry established in remote and underdeveloped area producing
brandy, cider and wine based on fruits shall have forty percent and 25 percent
exemption from income tax for ten years from the date of commencement of the
transaction.
(3i)70 Any person receiving royalty income from exportation of intellectual
property shall have twenty-five percent exemption at the rate of income tax leviable
on such income.
(3j)71Any person receiving income from the sale through transfer of
intellectual property shall have fifty percent exemption at the rate of income tax
leviable on such income.
(3k)72The industry related to tourism or the airlines company
operatinginternational flight established with capital investment of more than two
67Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
68Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
69Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
70Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
71Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
thousand million rupees shall have full exemption for five years from the date of
commencement of the transaction and fifty percent exemption at the rate of leviable
income tax for three years afterwards.
(3l)73If a special industry or industry related to tourism sector capitalizes its
accumulated profit into shares for increase in capacity of the same industry, there
shall be full exemption from the dividend tax leviable in distribution of dividends
from such capitalization.
(3m)74If any company having the paid-up capital of five hundred million
rupees or more operating as a private company converts into a public company and
operate its transaction, it shall have ten percent exemption from the leviable tax for
three years from the date of its conversion into public company.
Provided that a company required to be incorporated as a public company
under Section 12 of the Company Act, 2063(2006) shall not have the facility referred
to in this sub-section.
(3n)75 A domestic tea producing and processing industry, dairy industry
having transaction in milk products or textile industry shall have fifty percent
exemption at the rate of income tax leviable on the income earned from sale of its
products.
(30)76 A health institution operated by a community institution shall twenty
peccent exemption from its taxable income tax,
(3p)77A micro-enterprise shall have full exemption from leviable income tax
for seven years from the date of commencement of its business or transaction. If such
a microenterprise is operated by a woman entrepreneur, it shall have full exemption
from leviable income tax for additional three years.
(3q)78If any entity in any income year operates any project such as building
and operation a public infrastructure to be transferred to the Government of Nepal or
building a powerhouse, generation and transmission of electricity, such entity shall
have twenty percent tax exemption from its taxable income.
(3r)79Special industry established and operated on industrial region or
industrial village shall have 25 percent exemption from chargeable income tax from
the date of commencement.
(4)80 If any person carries on transactions qualifying for different tax
exemption facilities pursuant to this Section, income shall be computed to obtain such
facility as if that income were derived by separate persons.
72Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
73Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
74Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
75Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
76Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
77Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
78Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
79Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
(Unofficial Translation)
(5)81 A person who is in a position to have more than one exemption in respect
of the same income pursuant this Section shall enjoy only one exemption chosen by
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if any other person
has used the properties used to operate the industry referred to in clause (b) for the
operation of the industry of the same type previously, the period during which they
have been so used shall also be reckoned, while reckoning the time-limit referred to in
that sub-section.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section:
(a) "Agricultural business" means a business of producing crops from a public
or private land or acquiring rent or crops from a tenant using the land.
(b)82"Least developed", "undeveloped" and "underdeveloped area" means the
areas referred to in Schedule-10 of the Industrial Enterprises Act,
2076(2019).
(c)83"Special industry" means a production based industry, industry based on
agriculture and forest products and mineral industry as classified in subsection (2) of Section 15 of the Industrial Enterprises Act, 2076 (2019).
other than any industry producing cigarette, Bidi, Sigar, tobacco, Khaini,
Gutkha, Pan Masala, other goods of the same nature involving tobacco as
the principal raw materials, liquors, beer and products of similar kind.
(d)84"Micro-enterprise" means any micro-enterprise classified in clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the Industrial Enterprises Act, 2076
(2019).
(7)85 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3a) and (3c), if the
property used in operation of the industry or business mentioned in the same subsections is an old property used by other person for the operation of industry or
business of the same kind or other kind, the facilities referred to in those sub-sections
shall not be available.
1l A.86Tax chargeable on construction and operation of infrastructure: If any agreement is
concluded between the Government of Nepal and any person for the construction and
operation of any infrastructure, the person constructing and operating such
infrastructure shall enjoy the tax facilities provided by the Act in force at the time of
conclusion of the agreement for the whole period of the agreement.
80Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
81Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
82Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
83Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
84Amended by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
85Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
86Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
11B.87Concession with respect to infrastructure development projects of national importance:
There shall not be sought the source of income of any investment made in any
infrastructure development project of national importance such as a hydropower
project, international airport, subway, road and railway or in a manufacturing industry
(except an industry producing cigarette, Bidi, Sigar, chewing tobacco, Khaini, gutkha,
pan masala, liquor and beer) providing employment to more than three hundred
domestic workers and using more than fifty percent of domestic raw materials, till
2076 Magh (mid-February 2020).
12. Donation, gift given to organizations entitled to tax exemption: (1) In computing his
taxable income in any income year, any person may make claim to subtract the amount of
donation, gift given to an organization entitled to tax exemption approved by the
Department for the purpose of this Section.
(2)88 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the expenditure
deductible in any income year shall not exceed one hundred thousand rupees or five
percent of the adjusted taxable income of such person for that year, whichever is the
lesser.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), in any special
situation, the Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, so
specify that any amount spent or donated by any person for any work specified in that
notification may be deducted fully or partly for expenditure, in determining the income of
that person.
12A. 89Expenses on heritage protection and spo1ts development: In computing its taxable
income in any income year, any company may make claim to subtract an amount not
exceeding one million rupees or an amount to be set by ten per cent of the assessable
income, whichever is the lesser out of the expenditure made by it in that year in the
protection and preservation of historical, religious and cultural heritages in Nepal or in
the construction of public physical infrastructure of sports, upon prior approval of the
Department.
12B .90Expenses contributed to Prime Minister Natural Calamities Fund and reconstruction
fund established by the Government of Nepal: Any person contributing any amount in
any income year to the Prime Minister Natural Calamities Fund and reconstruction fund
Established by the Government of Nepal may deduct such amount in computing taxable
income for that year.
87Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
88Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
89Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
90Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-5
Deductible Amounts
13. General deduction: Any person may, for the purpose of computing his income from any
business or investment in any income year, deduct the following expenditures related
with the transactions, subject to this Act:
(a) Made in that income year,
(b) Made by that person, and
(c) Made in earning income from the business or investment.
14. Interest deduction: (1) Any person may, for the purpose of computing his income from
any business or investment in any income year, deduct all interests chargeable, in that
year under the following debt liabilities created for the act of generating income from
business or investment, of that person:
(a) If the debt liability has created for having borrowed any amount, and that
amount has been used in that year or used to buy any property used in that
year, or
(b) That debt liability has been created m any other circumstance.
(c)91................... 86 .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a resident entity
controlled by an organization entitled to tax exemption 92can deduct the interest if
paid to the person controlling or the concerned person pursuant to sub-section ( 1) in
any income year and such interest amount shall not exceed the total of the following
amounts:
(a) All interest amounts obtained in that year to be included in the
computation of the taxable income of that entity, and
(b) Fifty percent amount of the 93adjustable taxable income of that entity in
that year, which has been computed excluding any interest derived by that
entity or without deducting any interest paid by that entity.
(3) Any interest not allowed to be deducted or not deducted pursuant to subsection (2) may be carried forward or credited in the forthcoming income year.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "a resident entity controlled by
an organization entitled to tax exemption" means an entity which, being a resident
entity in that year, is subject to a vested ownership or control of twenty-five percent or
more of the following persons or organizations in any time of that year:
91Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
92Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
93Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) An organization entitled to tax exemption and a person associated with that
organization,
(b) A person entitled to tax exemption pursuant to Section 11 in that year or a
person associated with that person,
(c) A non-resident person or a person associated with the non-resident person,
(d) Any combination of the persons referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c).
15. Allowances for cost of stock-in-trade: (1) For the purpose of computing the income
earned by any person from any business in any year, any other allowances shall be
allowed except the allowances for the cost computed pursuant to sub-section (2) in
respect of the disposal of the stock-in-trade of the business of that person in that year.
(2) The allowance for the cost referred to in sub-section (1) shall be computed as
follows by deducting the amount referred to in clause (b) from the amount referred to in
clause (a):
(a) The amount to be set by adding the cost of the stock-in-trade derived from
any business in any income year to the initial value of the stock-in-trade of
that business in that year,
(b) The amount of final value of the stock-in-trade of anybusiness in an
income year referred to in clause (a).
(3) The initial value of the stock-in-trade of any business in any income year
shall be the final value of the stock-in-trade of that business at the end of last income
year.
(4) Whichever is lesser out of the following amounts shall be considered the
final value of the stock-in-trade of that business of that income year:
(a) The cost of the stock-in-trade of that business at the end of that income
year, or
(b) The market value of the stock-in-trade of that business at the end of that
income year.
(5) In computing the cost of the stock-in-trade of a business, a person has to do
as follows subject to Section 45 and subsection (6):
(a) In computing the income of a business, in the case ofa person maintaining
the accounts on the cash basis, by using the method of cost price or
consumption cost, and
(b) In computing the income of a business, in the case of a person
maintaining the accounts on the accrual basis, by using the method of
consumption cost.
(Unofficial Translation)
(6)94If the stock-in-trade of business of any person cannot be determined, that
person may choose to the first in first out method or average cost method to compute
the cost of stock-in-trade.
(7) When computing the cost of stock-in-trade pursuant to sub-section (5), it
has to be computed by the following method:
(a) When computing as per the consumption cost method, to so compute the
cost of the stock-in-trade under the widely recognized accounting principle
that it is equal to the sum total of direct material cost, direct labor cost and
overhead cost of factory.
(b) When computing as per the cost price method, to so compute the cost of
the stock-in-trade under the widely recognized accounting principle that it
is equal to the total sum of direct material cost, direct labor cost and
alterable overhead cost of factory.
(8) When computing the cost of stock-in-trade pursuant to sub-section (6), it
has to be computed by the following method:
(a)95When computing as per the average cost method, to compute all the
stock-in-trade of the same type in the business under the widely
recognized accounting principle as per the average cost method.
(b) When computing as per the first in first out method, to compute on the
basis that the stock-in-trade received first is also disposed first, under the
widely recognized accounting principle.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Direct labor cost" means the labor cost directly related with the
production of the stockin-trade.
(b) "Direct material cost" means the cost of materials which are or will be an
integral part of the stock-in-trade.
(c) "Overhead cost of factory" means the total cost incurred in producing
stock-in-trade except the direct labor cost and direct material cost.
96Provided that no any amount for repair and maintenance and depreciation
deduction shall be included in the overhead cost of the factory.
(d) "Alterable overhead cost of factory" means the overhead cost of factory
that alters directly with a change in the produced quantity of stock-intrade.
97Provided that no amount for repair and maintenance and depreciation
deduction shall be included in alterable overhead cost of the factory.
94Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
95Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
96Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
16. Repair and maintenance expenses: (1) When computing the income of any business or
investment in any income year, a person may deduct all expenses incurred in the repair
and maintenance of the depreciable property owned and used in that year to earn income
from that business or investment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in deducting the
expenses allowable under that sub-section, it shall not exceed seven percent of the
depreciation base amount of the group of property remaining at the end of that income
year.
Provided that no such limit shall be applicable to repair and maintenance expenses
incurred in testing of an airplane pursuant to the standards determined by the Civil
Aviation Authority of Nepal by the person providing air transport service.
(3) Any excess expense or part thereof on repair and maintenance which is not
deductible because of the limit referred to in sub-section (2) may be added to the
depreciation base amount of the group of the concerned property in the beginning of
upcoming income year.
17. Pollution control expenses: (1) For the purposes of computing the income earned by any
person from any business in any income year, such person may deduct the pollution
control expenses to the extent incurred in the operation of that business in that year.
(2)98 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in computing the
limit of expenses deductible under that sub-section in any income year, it shall not exceed
fifty percent of the adjustable taxable income of all business operated by such person.
(3) Any excess expense or part thereof which is not deductible in excess of the
limit referred to in sub-section (2) may be capitalized and depreciated pursuant to
Schedule-299 in the beginning of the upcoming income year.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "pollution control expenses" means the
expenses incurred by any person related with any process for the purpose of controlling
pollution or protecting or conserving the environment in other manner.
18. Research and development expenses: (1) For the purposes of computing the income
earned by any person from any business in any income year, such person may deduct the
research and development expenses to the extent incurred in the operation of that business
in that year.
(2)100Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in computingthe
limit of expenses deductible under that sub-section in any income year, it shall not exceed
fifty percent of the adjustable taxable income of all business operated by such person.
(3) Any excess expense or part thereof which is not deductible in excess of the
limit referred to in sub-section (2) may be capitalized and depreciated pursuant to
Schedule-2101in the beginning of the upcoming income year.
97Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
98Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
99Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
100Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "research and development expenses"
means the expenses incurred by any person for the purpose of controlling developing his
business and improving commercial production and process.
Provided that such expenses shall not include the cost at the time of acquiring any
property referred to in sub-section (3) of Section I of Schedule-2.
19. Depreciation deduction expenses: (1) For the purposes of computing the income earned
by any person from any business or investment in any income year, such person 99shall
deduct depreciation pursuant to Schedule-Z in lieu of depreciation of the depreciable
properties owned and used by that person in that year in making income from that
business or investment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the following
provisions shall be applicable in respect of the deduction for depreciation of the devices,
equipment and other machineries installed by any entityin the projects which involve
truction and operation of public infrastructures and are transfered to the Government of
Nepal and in the projects on construction of powerhouses and generation and
transmission of electricity:-
(a) If the devices, equipment and other machineries installed previously become
obsolete because of being old or worn and tom and new devices, equipment and
other machineries have to be installed in lieu thereof, the value which remains by
subtracting depreciation deduction until the income year from the cost of the
property, which has become obsolete property because of being old or worn and
tom, installed previously in that income year in which they were so installed may
be deducted as expenses.
(b) In respect of properties other than the old properties replaced pursuant to clause
(a), if any value remains by subtracting depreciation deduction until the income
year when transfer takes place from the cost of those properties at the time when
the entity transfers such a project to the Government of Nepal, the entity may
deduct such a remaining value as expenses.
20. Loss from business or investment: (1) For the purposes of computing the income earned
by any person from any business or investment in any mcome year, such person may
deduct the loss as mentioned below:
(a) Loss suffered by that person from any other business and not deducted in that
year, and
(b) 102Loss suffered by that person from any business and not deducted in the last
seven income years.
Provided that in the case of a project of building and operation of any public
infrastructure, which is then transferred to the Government of Nepal, a project on
construction of powerhouse and generation and transmission of electricity, and an
entity conducting petroleum work pursuant to the Nepal Petroleum Act, 2040 (1983),
loss not deducted in the last twelve income years.
101Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
102Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2)103 For the purposes of computing the income earned by any person from
any investment in any income year, such person shall be allowed to deduct the loss
suffered by that person from any other investment and not deducted in that year and
the loss incurred by that person from such investment or any other investment which
could not be deducted in the past seven years.
(3) Subject to sub-sections (1) and (2), and for the purposes of these subsections, any loss suffered by any person in respect of the foreign source and not
deducted may be deducted only in computing the income earned by that person from
his foreign source, and the loss suffered in earning any non-taxable income and not
deducted may be deducted only in computing non-taxable income of that person.
(4) Subject to sub-sections (1) and (2), if any person suffers a loss in an
income year when a long-term contract obtained by any person by making
competition of the business at the international level was completed or when a
disposal was made in any other manner or a loss which was not deducted and the
liability whereof is allowed to be carried forward in the coming year pursuant to
clause (b) of sub-section (1) is related with a long-term contract, the Department may,
by a notice in writing, give permission to deal with that loss as follows.-
(a) The loss may be carried backward in last income year or years, and
(b) The loss may be treated as not deducted only to theextent of the excess
where, in computing the income of the business related with that long-term
contract, the amounts to be included in the incomings exceed the amounts
to be included in the outgoings.
(5) The following loss suffered by any person in any income year has to be
allocated as if it were related with a long-term contract or contracts of that person:
(a) The loss resulted from a long-term contract or contracts related with the
business, and
(b) The loss on excess of the expenses to be deductible in computing the
income earned from that business in the year related with the contract for
each such contract.
(6) If, when computing the income earned by any person in any income from
more than one business or investment, that person is allowed to deduct the loss not
deducted from more than one business or investment, that person may on his own
determine the priority of the business or investment from which the portion of loss is
deducted.
(7) If, when computing the loss suffered by any person from any business or
investment in any income year, this section is not used and the deductible amounts
exceed the amounts includable in computing the income from the business or
investment of that person, such excess amounts have to be computed.
103Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(8)104 If any person has received full tax exemption in respect of income of
business or investment in any income year, the loss incurred in that income year shall
not be carried forward to upcoming income year.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "the loss not deducted" means the
loss to the extent not deducted in computing the income of any person pursuant to
sub-section (1), (2) or (4).
21. Expenses not allowed for deduction: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Act, for the purpose of computing the income earned by any person from any
business, employment or investment in any income year, the following expenses or
amounts shall not be deducted:
(a) Expenses of domestic or personal nature,
(b) Tax payable under this Act and a fine or similar other fee paid to the
government of any country or any local body thereof for a violation of any
law or regulation, byelaw framed thereunder,
105Provided that the tax paid to the provincial Government and Local Level
shall be deducted as expenses.
(c) Expenses to the extent of those spent by any person to obtain the amounts
enjoying exemption pursuant to Section 10 or expenses made to obtain the
amounts from which tax has been deducted finally,
(d) Expenses for the payments referred to in sub-section (2),
(dl)106 Remuneration and wages expenses distributed to employees and
workers having no permanent accounts number, except time basis wages up
to three thousand rupees.
(d2)107 Expenses against invoices of more than two thousand rupees wherein
permanent accounts number is not mentioned,
Provided that purchase directly from natural person who do not
engaged business transaction of goods: agricultural, forestry, animal
product and other household goods such purchase expenditure will be valid
even if seller do not have permanent account number.
(e) Distribution of profits by any entity, or
(f) Similar other amounts despite that they are not so mentioned in clauses (a),
(b), (c), (d) and (e) as not to be deductible, except those allowable under
this Chapter or Chapter-6, 7, 10, 12 or 13.
104Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
105Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
106Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
107Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) If a person, whose annual turnover is more than two million rupees in any
income year, makes a cash payment of more than fifty thousand rupees at a time in
that income year except in the following circumstances, he shall not be allowed to
make that deduction:
(a) Payment made to the Government of Nepal, constitutional body,
corporation or bank or financial institution owned by the Government of
Nepal,
(b) Payment made to a farmer or producer producing a primary agro-product
and payment to a farmer who has processed such product on his own,
notwithstanding that primary processing of such product has already been
carried out,
(c) Payment for retirement contribution or retirement payment,
(d) Payment made in a place where banking services are not available,
(e) Payment made on the day when banking services are closed or payment
involving a mandatory provision of payment in cash, or
(f)Amount deposited in a bank account of the recipient of payment.
(3) Subject to the provisions of Sections 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 71, no
amount shall be deductible for capital expenses or foreign income tax.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Expenses of domestic or personal nature" means the following expenses:
(1)108 Private expenses of any individual, and expenses made inclusive of
the following expenses made for the interest of a loan to the extent
that the loan has been used for personal purpose:
(a) Expenses made for an individual for the provision of lodging, food,
snacks, and other activities of entertainment or amusement,
(b) Expenses for the movement by an individual from his house to the
place where the business or investment is operated except for the
movement in the course of business or investment,
(c) Expenses made to purchase clothes for an individual except those
clothes which are not proper to put on at other times than working
times, and
(d) Expenses made for education or training. Provided that the expenses
made only for the education directly related with the business or
investment, where no degree or diploma is achieved.
108Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) Except in the following circumstances and to that extent, expenses incurred
in respect of a payment made by any person to any individual and
expenses made for a third person:
(a) If that payment has been included in computing the income of an
individual,
(b) If the individual has made, as a consideration, a return payment to that
person in a sum equal to the market value of the payment received by
(c) If payment is made for such prescribed petty amounts of which
accounts are difficult or administratively impracticable to be
maintained.
(b) "Place where banking service is available" means any place within ten
kilometers area whereof banking service is available.
(c)109"Cash payment" means a payment except a payment by a letter of credit,
account payee cheque, draft, money order, telegraphic transfer, money transfer
(hundi) through a bank or financial institution to be deposited in bank account
and a transfer made by any other means between banks or financial
institutions.
(d) "Capital expenses" means the following expenses:
(1) Expenses incurred in feasibility study, exploration and development of
natural resources,
(2) Expenses incurred in acquiring any property with useful life for more than
twelve months, or
(3) Expenses in disposing a liability.

Chapter-6
Tax Accounting and Time
22. Method of tax accounting: (1) The matter when any person gets any income or makes any
expense shall be determined in accordance with the widely recognized accounting
principle, subject to this Act.
(2) An individual shall, while computing the income to be earned from his
employment and investment, maintain accounts on the cash basis, for purposes of tax.
(3) A company shall maintain accounts on the accrual basis, for purposes of tax.
109Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(4) Except if the Department has otherwise specified by issuing a notice in
writing, any person may, for purposes of income tax, maintain accounts on the cash or
accrual basis, subject to subsections (1), (2) and (3).
(5) Any person may make an application to change the method of accounting for
tax purposes, subject to sub-sections (2) and (3). If the Department thinks that it is
necessary to change the method of accounting to clearly show the income of such person,
the Department may give permission to change the method of accounting.
(6) If the method of accounting of any person for purposes of tax is changed
pursuant to sub-section (5), in computing the income of that person in the income year
when such change is made, adjustment has to be so made that no amounts out of those
included, deducted or to be included or deducted are omitted or duplicated.
23. Cash basis accounting: Any person shall, in maintaining accounts on cash basis of his
income earned from employment, business or investment for tax purposes, subject to this
Act, do as follows:
(a) To treat as income only that which is received at the time when payment is
received by him or made available to him and include it in his income.
(b) To deduct for expense only after he pays out.
24. Accrual basis accounting: (1) Any person shall, in maintaining accounts on the accrual
basis of his income earned from business or investment subject to this Act, for purposes
of tax, any income shall be included in computation of his income, considering that any
payment has been received immediately when the right to receive such payment is
created.
(2) For the purposes of making deduction 110in computing income earned by any
person as mentioned in sub-section (1), the following expenses shall be deemed to have
been borne:
(a) If any payment involving such expenses has been made in lieu of a payment made
by any other person, the expenses shall be deemed to have been borne in the
following circumstances:
(1) The person has the liability to make that payment,
(2)111 The value of such liability can be ascertained in a realistic manner, and
(3) Payment has been received from another person.
(b) In all other circumstances except that mentioned in clause (a), an expense shall be
deemed to have been borne at the time when payment is made.
(3)112 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Department
may recognize the accounting specified by the Nepal Rastra Bank with respect to
110Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
111Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
112Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
banking business, subject to the Nepal Rastra Bank Act, 2058 (2002) and prevailing
laws relating to banking.
Provided that a cooperative organization may keep accounting of interest
income on cash basis.
(4)113 Where, in computing, on the accrual basis, the income earned by any
person from a business or investment, any payment receivable by that person is
included or any payment to be borne by that person is deducted, and a difference
occurs in the amount received or paid by that person because of, inter alia, difference
in the exchange rate, the difference has to be adjusted in receiving or making
payment.
25. Reverse of the amounts including bad debt: (1) When maintaining accounts of the
amounts received and expenses borne in the computation of the income earned by any
person from any employment, business or investment, the person has to make proper
adjustments at the time of reimbursement, recovery, relinquishment of claim, writing off,
or remission in any of the following circumstances:
(a) Where that person 114pays back such amount, or recovers the expense, as
the case may be,
(b) Where the accounts of the amount received have been maintained on the
accrual basis and the person subsequently relinquishes his right to receive
that amount or where that amount is a debt claim of that person and he
writes off the debt as a bad debt, or
(c) Where the accounts of the expense incurred have been maintained on the
accrual basis and the person subsequently relinquishes his liability to incur
such expense or where that expense is a debt claim, the person whom the
debt is to be repaid remits the debt.
(2) Any person may relinquish the right to receive any amount or to write off
the debt liability of that person as a bad debt only in the following circumstances:
(a) In the case of a debt claim of any financial institution or bank, the debt
claim is converted into a bad debt as per the specified criteria, and
(b) If, after having followed all proper measures to receive payment in
circumstances other than those referred to in clause (a), that person is
reasonably satisfied that the right or debt claim cannot be realized or
recovered.
26. Method of deriving average of amounts includible and deductible under long-term
contract: (1) For purposes of computing the income earned by any person from any
employment, business or investment in any income year, the estimated amounts
includible and deductible according to the sum of sequential increase as per the
percentage of completion of the contract under the long-term contract of that person, shall
be deemed to have been received or spent.
113Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
114Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "long-term contract" means any
contract of the following nature:
(a) A contract with a validity period of more than twelve months, and
(b) A contract with a deferred consideration except a contract which is concluded
for production, installation or construction or for the discharge for relevant
services for each of such works or which does not contain such elements.
(2) A contract with a deferred consideration, a contract to be included
according to the sum of sequential increase, a contract to be deducted according to the
sum of sequential increase, an excluded contract and a contract of completion
percentage shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-7
Quantification, Allocation and Characterization of Amounts
27. Quantification of amounts: (1) Any payment has to be quantified equal to the following
amount:
(a) In the case of a payment made by way of transferring 115............. property by
any person to another person, amount equal to the market value of the
transferred116....... property,
(b) The amount to be determined as prescribed for the payment made for the
provision of the following matters or the amounts to be determined pursuant to
clause (e) where there is no provision for determining the amount:
(1) A motor vehicle used or made available for use for personal purposes of
the recipient of payment in full or in part, or
(2) A building made available for the recipient of payment.
(c) The amount which remains by deducting the contributions of the recipient of
payment from the expenditure made by the person making payment for the
provision of the following:
(1) The services of a caretaker of the house, cook, driver, gardener or other
domestic assistant,
(2) Any food, beverage or entertainment, or
(3) Services like water, electricity, telephone installed in the residence of the
recipient.
115Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
116Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(d) If the interest paid by any person who has to receive payment in any income
year for a loan is less than the amount of interest to be paid as per the
prevailing interest rate, the amount to the extent of such a less,
(e) In respect of a payment except the payment referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c)
and (d), if a third person receives payment instead of the recipient of payment,
the amount equal to the value of benefit derivable generally.
(2) The time when a payment is earned, received, made, borne or otherwise
worked out for tax purposes in respect of clauses (a) and (e) of sub-section (1) shall be
the time when the quantification of amounts has been made.
28. Conversion into money: (1) If the income of a person and the amounts to be included and
deducted in assessing the income has been quoted in other currency except Nepalese
rupees, such amounts have to be converted into Nepalese rupees.
(2) If the amounts to be included or deducted in computing the income of any
person in any income year have been quoted in other currency except Nepalese rupees,
such currency has to be converted into Nepalese rupees as per the exchange rate
prevailing at the time when the amount was received, expended, paid, or otherwise
worked out for tax purposes.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if the Department has,
by issuing a notice in writing, given permission for purposes of that sub-section, any
person may apply the average exchange rate prescribed by the Department.
29 117 Indirect payments: If any person gets indirect benefit from the payments made by the
payer or a person associated with him or specify other person to receive the payment, the
Department may, by issuing a notice in writing, treat such other person or specified
person as the recipient of payment.
30. Investment under joint ownership: Any person shall allocate the amounts to be included
or deducted in computing the income for purposes of computing the income earned from
the investment under joint ownership with other persons on the basis of proportion of the
respective interests of the joint owners in that investment.
31. Characterization of payment for compensation: If any person or his associated person has
received any compensation amount for the following matters including payments for
insurance, at the time of receipt of the amount for the compensation, such amount has to
be included, as the case may be,in computing the income earned from employment,
business or investment:-
(a) Compensation for any income earned or likely to be earned by that person
from any business or investment or for any amount to be included in the
computation of that income, or
(b) Compensation for any loss suffered or likely to be suffered by that person from
any business or investment or for any expenses to be deducted in the
computation of that income.
117Amended by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
118Provided that,
(1) The amount of payment of compensation for physical damage of the
resident individual from personal accident shall not be included in the
income and such expenses in treatment of damage from such accident shall
not be claimed for tax adjustment pursuant to Section 51.
(2) The compensation amount to be received for the death of an individual
shall not be included in the income.
32. Characterization of payment under annuities, installment sale and financial lease: (1) Any
payment made by the person who acquires a property under annuities or installment sale
or payment made to any person for the use of any property under a financial lease shall be
treated as the interest and return of capital under the debt claim under this section.
(2) All payments referred to in sub-section (1) have to be calculated in gross and
the total sum thereof has to be divided into two portions as follows:
(a) Capital portion comprising all payments for annuities as per necessity or
equivalent to the market value of any property at the time of selling that
property by installment or leasing it, and
(b) Interest portion to be set by subtracting the capital portion from the total
sum of all payments referred to in subsection (l).
(3) Total payment schedule shall be provided by clearly setting out the capital
and interest portions, ....119in determining installments, at the time when annuity,
installment sale or financial lease is made. One who cannot provide such schedule has
to treat the interest and principal portion, annuity, installment sale or financial lease as
if they were mixed loans with interest to be kept on adding in every six months and
allocate them in payments as referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) The borrower has to pay the principal in part and the interest in part by
working out the portion of interest in the due and payable principal at the time of each
payment in a manner that the rate of interest is the same during the period of loan of
payment to be made pursuant to sub-section (1) as if it were a mixed loan.
(5) The following terms have to be fulfilled in making a lease under a financial
lease pursuant to this section:
(a) Where the lease agreement contains an option that ownership is
transferred after expire of the validity period of the lease or the lessee can
purchase that property at a certain price or a foreseen price after expire of
the validity period of the lease,
(b) Where the period of lease exceeds seventy-five percent of the useful life
of that property,
118Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
119Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) Where the estimated market value of that property after expire of the
period of the lease is less than twenty percent of the market value of that
property prevailing at the beginning of the lease,
(d) In the case of a lease that commences prior to the ultimate twenty-five
percent life of the useful life of the property, where the current value of the
minimum lease payment is equal to ninety percent of the market value of
that property at the time of commencement of the period of the lease or
more than that, or
(e) Where a property has been prepared in a special manner for the lessee
and, after expire of the period of lease, that property is not of practical use
for any other person except the lessee.
(6) Each payment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be divided into two
portions pursuant to sub-section (3), and the interest portion under the debt claim has
to be treated as paid or to be paid interest and the capital portion as repayment of
capital.
(7) A lessee under a financial lease shall be treated as the person having
ownership of the property leased, and the lesser shall be treated as having debt claim
over the lessee.
(8) The current value of the lease payment has to be computed by applying
discount rate equal to the normal interest rate.
Explanation: "Period of lease" means and includes an additional period for
which the Jessee is entitled to have the lease renewed.
33. Price transferring and other arrangements between associated persons: (1) If any
provision is made between the associated persons and the provision is operated as per
arms length, the Department may, by issuing a notice in writing, distribute, appropriate or
allocate the amounts to be included or deducted in computing the income between those
persons in such a manner as to reflect the taxable income or the payable tax that could be
set for them.
(2) In carrying anything mentioned in sub-section (1), the Department may do as
follows:
(a) To re-characterize any income, loss, amount or source and type of
payment, or
(b) Where various expenses including main office expenses which any person
had to incur to operate any business have yielded benefits to the associated
person or persons, to allocate such expenses between the associated
persons on the comparative basis of the turnover of the business.
34. Division of income: (1) If any person attempts to divide his income with another person
and it appears that it will anyhow lessen the payable tax, the Department may, in order
not to allow such less in liability, have the amounts to be included or deducted in
computing the income of each person adjusted by giving a notice in writing.
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The transfer of the following amounts by one or more interposed entities
directly or indirectly between persons and associated persons as mentioned m sub-section
(1) and circumstances where attempts are made to divide income to lessen the tax
required to be paid by the persons or associated persons by virtue of that transfer shall
also be included.-
(a) The amounts to be received and expenses to be incurred, or
(b) The amounts to be received or used from any property by the transferee of
that property or expenses incurred or payment made by that person for the
acquisition of ownership of that property.
(3) In determining as to whether or not any person has "attempted to divide
any income pursuant to sub-section (2), the Department shall take the market value of
any payment made for the transfer as the basis.
35. General rule against tax avoidance: For purposes of ascertaining the tax liability pursuant
to this Act, the Department may carry out the followings:
(a) To re-characterize any arrangement or any part of such arrangement made or
attempted to be made as a part of a tax avoidance scheme,
(b) To disregard any arrangement or any part of such arrangement that does not
show any substantial effect, or
(c) To re-characterize any arrangement or any part of such arrangement that does
not show any substantial element.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "tax avoidance scheme" means any
arrangement with a main objective to have avoidance of tax liability or to lessen
the tax liability.

Chapter-8
Assessment of Net Profit from Property and Liability
36. Net profits from property and liability: (1) The net profits derived from the disposal of
business assets or liability of a business of any person for any income year shall be
computed by deducting the following losses from the sum of all profits derived from the
disposal of business assets or liability of that business in that income year:
(a) The sum of all losses suffered in that year from the disposal of business
assets or liability,
(b) The loss that could not be deducted elsewhere out of the net loss suffered
from any other business of that person in that year, and
(c) The loss that could not be deducted out of the net loss suffered from that
business in any income year or from any other business of that person in
the past.
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The net profits derived from the disposal of taxable nonbusiness assets of
investment of any person for any income year shall be computed by deducting the
following losses from the sum of all profits derived from the disposal of taxable nonbusiness assets of that investment in that income year:
(a) The sum of all losses suffered in that year from the disposal of nonbusiness taxable assets of that investment,
(b) The loss that could not be deducted elsewhere out of the net loss suffered
from any other business or investment of that person in that year, and
(c) The loss that could not be deducted out of the net loss suffered from that
investment, any business or any other investment of that person in any past
income year.
(3) Any person can make a claim for deduction pursuant to sun-section (1) or
(2) in respect of a loss suffered from the disposal of the property or liability of foreign
source only to the extent of the benefit derived from the disposal of any property or
liability of foreign source.
(4) If any person is entitled, under sub-section (1) or (2) to deduct the net loss
suffered from a business or investment in more than one computation pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), he may select computations for the purpose of deducting that loss or
portion thereof.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(1) "Net loss" means, -
(a) In respect of any business, the amount to the extent that the loss suffered
from the disposal of the business assets or liability of that business in any
income year exceeds the profit derived from the disposal of business assets
or liability of that business in that year, and
(b) In respect of any investment, the amount to the extent that the loss
suffered from the disposal of the taxable non-business assets of that
investment in any income year exceeds the profit derived from the disposal
of taxable non-business assets of that investment in that year.
(2) "Net loss that could not be deducted" means, with respect to any business or
investment:
(a) The loss in any income year that could not be deducted, pursuant to clause
(b) or ( c) of sub-section ( 1) or clause (b) or ( c) of sub-section (2), out of
the net loss suffered by that business or investment in that income year,
(b) Any such loss of that business or investment referred to in sub-section (7)
of Section 20 that could not be deducted and is not qualified for remission
by virtue of the time-limit referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) of Section
(Unofficial Translation)
37. Profit and loss made from property and liability: (1) The profit derived by any person
from the disposal of any property or liability has to be computed, considering it to be the
extent that the sum of the income derived from that property or liability exceeds the sum
of the outgoings for that property or liability at the time of disposal.
(2) The loss suffered by any person from the disposal of any property or liability has
to be computed, considering it to be the extent that the sum of the outgoings for that
property or liability exceeds the sum of the income earned from that property or liability
at the time of disposal.
38. Expenses and net expenses for property and liability: (1) The following expenses shall be
included in the expenses for the property or liability of any person, subject to this Act:
(a) In respect of any property, the expenses made by that person in acquiring
that property, inclusive of the following amounts:
(1) The related expenses made in the construction and production of that
property, and
(2) 120Any amount required to be included in the computation of the
income of that person as a result of acquisition of such property.
(b) The expenses made by that person in obtaining the ownership of that
property or liability, inclusive of the expenses incurred in the alteration,
improvement and repair and maintenance of the property or liability, and
the expenses in the repair and maintenance of the property,
(c) The expenses made by him in the disposal of the property or liability, and
(d) Casual expenses made by him in acquiring the property or bearing
liability and disposing such property or liability.
Provided that the expenses referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of
sub-section (1) of Section 21 and the expenses that are allowed to be deducted
in the assessment of income are not required to be included in such expenses.
(2) The net expenses for any property or liability at any particular time shall be so
computed as to consider the amounts to the extent of excess of the sum of all expenses for
that property or liability than the sum of all incomes for that property or liability at that
time.
(3) The amount of expenses to be deducted in computing the income as referred to in
Chapters-6 and 7 shall be deemed as if they were made in respect of the expenses for any
property or liability, and shall be applicable in respect of the expenses referred to in subsection (1).
Provided that Section 26 shall not apply to the abovementioned provision.
39. Income and net income for property and liability: (1) The following amounts shall be
included in the incomes for the property or liability of any person, subject to this Act:
120Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) The amounts received, in respect of the liability, by that person in bearing
the liability,
(b) The amounts to be received by that person in acquiring the property or in
respect of bearing the liability, including the amounts acquired by altering
or lessening the value of the property or increasing the liability, and
(c) The amounts received or to be received by that person in respect of the
disposal of that property or liability.
Provided that the amount exempted from tax, taxable amount, 121payment
subject to tax deduction finally or the amounts to be included in the income
in assessing the income of that person shall not be included in such income.
(2) The net incomes for any property or liability at any time shall include the
amounts to the extent of excess of the incomes for that property or liability than the
sum of all expenses for that property or liability at that time.
(3) The amount to be included in the income in computing the income as
referred to in Chapters-6 and 7 shall be deemed as if they were made in respect of the
incomes for any property or liability, and shall be dealt with pursuant to sub-section
Provided that Section 26 shall not apply to the abovementioned provision.
40. Disposal of property or liability: (1) If the ownership of any person over any property
ceases, he shall be deemed to have disposed that property. The disposal of property has to
include acts such as distribution of the property by the owner of the property,
amalgamation of the property in other property or liability, sale of the property in
installments or lease out to any other person under a financial lease, cancellation, destroy,
loss, expiration or surrender of the same.
(2) If the burden of liability of any person ceases, he shall be deemed to have
disposed that liability. The disposal of liability has to include acts such as settlement,
cancellation, release and completion of the liability or amalgamation of liability in other
liability or property.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), any person
shall be deemed to have disposed any property or liability in the following circumstances:
(a) In respect of an individual, immediately before the death of that person,
(b) In respect of any property, if the sum of the incomings for that property
exceeds the sum of the outgoings for that property,
(c) In respect of any property subject to debt claim, -
(1) If it has become a bad debt as per the standards as prescribed in respect
of a debt claim of a bank or financial institution, and
121Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) If, in any other circumstance, that person has reasonably believed the
debt claim as no recoverable.
Provided that the person has to have already pursued all proper
measures to recover that debt claim.
(d) If any person has started using business assets, nonbusiness taxable assets,
depreciable property or stockin-trade in a manner to alter the type thereof,
immediately before the use of the altered form of that property,
(e) In the circumstances referred to in Section 57 in respect of any entity, and
(f) Immediately before that person has become a non-resident person, except
the land or building situated in Nepal.
(4) If any person disposes any property by leasing it under a financial lease
pursuant to sub-section ( 1 ), the lessee of that property shall be deemed to have
acquired the ownership of that property at the time of disposal.
(5) The following provisions shall apply for purposes of computing the profits
derived by any person from the disposal of the property or liability:
(a) The amounts of net expenses for any property under ownership of any
person at the time of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be
equal to the market value of the property prevailing at that time,
(b) The amounts of net incomes for liability of any person at the time of
commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be equal to the amount as
per the market value of the liability prevailing at that time.
41. Disposal along with retention of property or liability: If any person disposes any property
or liability in any manner referred to in clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-section (3) of

Section 40, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) In respect of property, -
(1) That person shall be deemed to have received the amount equal to the
market value of that property at the time of disposal for the disposal,
(2) 122When that property is re-disposed, the net outgoings made for that
property until the time of disposal pursuant to this Section shall be
deemed to be equal to the amount receivable.
(b) In respect of liability, -
(1) That person shall be deemed to have spent the amount equal to the
market value of that liability at the time of disposal for the disposal,
122Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) 123When that liability is re-disposes, the incomings derived for that
liability pursuant to clause (1) until that time shall be deemed to be
equal to the amount of expenses.
42.Disposal through installment sale or financial lease: If any person disposes any property
by way of installment sale or lease under a financial lease to any other person, the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) The person who has disposed the property shall be deemed to have received
the amount equal to the market value of that property at the time of disposal
for the disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through disposal shall be deemed to
have incurred cost in a sum equal to clause (a).
Provided that this provision shall not be applicable where the provision of

Section 45 applies.
43. Transfer of property to husband, wife or former husband, wife: If any individual who is a
divorcee or lives apart upon having partition share disposes a property by transferring it to
her husband, his wife or former husband, wife, and that husband, wife or former husband,
wife makes a choice in writing to have this Section enforced, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have obtained, for disposal, the amount equal
to the net expenses incurred immediately before the disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through transfer shall be deemed to
have incurred cost in a sum equal to clause (a).
44. Transfer of property after death: If the ownership of any property is disposed through
transfer to any other person because of death of any individual, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have obtained, for disposal, the amount equal
to the market value of that property prevailing at the time of disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through transfer shall be deemed to
have incurred cost in a sum equal to clause (a).
45. Transfer between associated persons and other non-market transfers: (1) If any person
disposes any property by transferring it to an associated person or any other person for no
consideration, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) The person who has disposed the property shall be deemed to have
received the amount equal to the market value of that property at the time
of disposal for the disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through disposal shall be
deemed to have incurred cost in a sum equal to clause (a).
123Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Provided that this provision shall not apply where the provision of

Section 45 applies.
(c) In the case of the property transferred pursuant to subclause (5) of clause
(r) of Section 2, the costs incurred by the person transferring such property
shall be deemed to be the costs incurred by the person acquiring such
property.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any person
disposes any business assets, non-business 124taxable assets or property remaining as
stock-in-trade by transferring ownership over such property to any associated person
and the matters contained in sub-section (6) are fulfilled, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have received the amount equal to the net
loss suffered for that property immediately before the disposal, for the
disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through transfer shall be
deemed to have incurred cost in a sum equal to that mentioned in clause
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any person
disposes any depreciable property by transferring ownership over such property to
any associated person by fulfilling the matters contained in sub-section (6), the
following provisions shall apply:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have received, for the disposal, the amount
equal to the remaining value of the group of the descending system
pursuant to Section 4 of Schedule-2 at the time of disposal, and
(b) The person who has acquired the property through transfer shall be
deemed to have incurred cost in a sum equal to that mentioned in clause
(4) If any person disposes any liability by transferring it to an associated
person pursuant to this Section or by transferring it to any other person without
125giving any value, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) The person shall be deemed to have incurred cost for the disposal in a sum
equal to the market value or the net income earned for the liability
immediately before the disposal, whichever is lower, and
(b) The transferee of the liability shall be deemed to have received an amount
equal to that liability in respect of assumption of the liability.
Provided that this provision shall not be applicable where the provisions of
Sections 43 and 44 apply.
124Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
125Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(5) If any person disposes any liability assumed in earning income from any of
his business by transferring it to an associated person, by fulfilling the matters
mentioned in sub-section (6), the following provisions shall apply:
(a) The person shall be deemed to have incurred cost for the disposal in a sum
equal to the net income earned for the liability immediately before the
disposal, and
(b) The associated person shall be deemed to have received an amount equal
to that amount in respect of assumption of the liability.
(6) For purposes of sub-sections (2), (3) and (5), the following matters have to
be fulfilled:
(a) The disposed business assets, stock-in-trade or depreciable assets of
business shall be the business assets, stock-in-trade or depreciable assets of
business of the associated person immediately after the transfer by the
person making such disposal.
(b) The disposed non-business taxable assets, stock-in-trade or depreciable
property of any investment shall be the business assets, non-business
taxable assets stock-in trade or depreciable property of the associated
person immediately after the transfer by the person making such disposal.
(c) In the case of any liability, the liability has to be transferred to the
associated person for the earning of income from any business or
investment of the associated person.
(d) The transferor and the associated person shall have to be residents at the
time of transfer, and the associated person has not to be a person enjoying
tax exemption.
(e) The ownership vested in that property or burden vested in that liability
shall continue to exist fifty percent as the case may be.
(f) Both of that person and the associated person have to make request in
writing in order to enforce an option under sub-section (2), (3) or (5), as
the case may be.
46. Involuntary disposal of property or liability with substitution: (1) If any person, no later
than one year of the involuntary disposal of any property in any mode out of the modes
mentioned in sub-section ( 1) of Section 40, acquires ownership over other property of
similar type in lieu of that property and makes request in writing to have this Section
applied, it shall be as follows:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have received, for the disposal, an amount
equal to the sum of the following amounts:
(1) Net expenses for that property immediately before the disposal, and
(2) If the amount derived from the disposal exceeds the expenses incurred
in acquiring the substituted property, the amount of such excess, and
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) The person shall be deemed to have incurred expenses in a sum equal to
the sum of the following amounts, in acquiring the substituted property.
(1) Net expenses for the disposed property immediately before the
disposal, and
(2) If the expenses incurred in acquiring the substituted property exceed
the amount derived from the disposal, the amount of such excess.
(2) If any person, no later than one year of the involuntary disposal of any
liability in any mode out of the modes mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 40,
bears other liability of similar type in lieu of that liability and makes request in
writing to have this Section applied, it shall be as follows:
(a) That person shall be deemed to have incurred expenses, for the disposal, in
a sum to be set by subtracting the amount mentioned in clause (2) from the
amount mentioned in clause (1):
(1) Amount for net incomes for that liability immediately before the
disposal, and
(2) If the expenses incurred in making that disposal exceed the amount in
assuming the substituted liability, the amount of such excess expenses.
(b) The person shall be deemed to have received a sum equal to the sum of the
following amounts, in acquiring the substituted liability:
(1) Net incomes for the disposed liability immediately before the disposal,
(2) If the amount derived in assuming the substituted liability exceeds the
expenses incurred in making the disposal, the amount of such excess.
(3) The circumstances where involuntary disposal is created after substitution
of one security of any entity for another security as a result of a change in the security
of the interest in the entity or restructuring of the entity shall be as prescribed.
47. Disposal upon amalgamation of property and liability: (1)If, as a result of acquisition of
any property or bearing of any liability by any person, any other property under
ownership of, or any other liability borne by, that person ceases or is amalgamated and
thus disposal takes places, then the following provisions shall apply:
(a) Where net expenses were incurred for the amalgamated property or
liability immediately before disposal, that person:
(1) shall be deemed to have received an amount equal to the net expenses
in respect of the disposal of the amalgamated property or liability,
Provided that such amount shall not exceed the amount received by
that person for the amalgamated liability.
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) shall be deemed to have incurred expenses in a sum equal to that
amount in holding ownership or bearing liability of the amalgamated
property.
(b) Where net incomes were earned for the amalgamated liability in respect of
the amalgamated liability, immediately before the disposal of the liability,
that person:
(1) shall be deemed to have incurred expenses in a sum equal to net
incomes for the disposal of the amalgamated liability,
Provided that m the case of the amalgamated property, that amount
shall not exceed the amount spent by that person in acquiring that
property.
(2) shall be deemed to have received an amount equal to that amount in
holding ownership of or bearing liability of the amalgamated property.
(2) Without prejudice to the matters contained in subsection (1), that subsection shall also apply to the following circumstances:
(a) If that person carries out an act of acquisition or sale of any property,
(b) If that person acquires the property leased, and
(c) If the guaranteed liability is transferred by the transferee.
47A.126Special provision on disposal as a result of merger of business: (1) In the case of
merger or acquisition of entities of the same nature carrying on banking and financial
business or insurance business, the provisions of clauses (a), (b ), ( d), ( e ), ( f) and (g)
of sub-section (2) of Section 57 and sub-section (3) of the same Section shall not apply.
Provided that if there remains any loss of the entity not in existence due to
merger which could not be deducted, such loss shall be deducted on pro rata in the
upcoming seven years. If the entity so deducting the loss in equal installment is redivided prior to the deduction of the whole loss, tax shall be paid in amount
deducted for such loss at the rate of tax prevailing in the fiscal year in which merger
or acquisition took place.
(2) If the property and liability are disposed upon the merger of the entities
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be as follows:
(a) In the case of stock-in-trade and business assets, -
(1) Amount equal to net expenses for property immediately before the
disposal shall be deemed to have been received by such person for
such disposal, and
(2) Amount equal to that mentioned in sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to
have been spent by the person acquiring property,
126Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) In case of disposal of depreciable property, -
(1) Amount equal to the remaining value of the group of descending
system pursuant to Section 4 of Schedule-4 at the time of disposal shall
be deemed to have been received for such disposal, and
(2) Amount equal to that mentioned in sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to
have been spent by the person acquiring property.
(c) In case of disposal of liability, -
(1) Amount equal to the market value immediately before the disposal or
to the net income of liability, whichever is lesser, shall be deemed to
have been spent by that person for such disposal, and
(2) Amount equal to that mentioned in sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to
have been received by the person bearing liability as result of bearing
such liability.
(d) The entity amalgamating the business or the entity being amalgamated
shall, in computing the cost of property and liability, compute only the cost
of the property and liability maintained at the time of operating such
amalgamated business (before merger or acquisition) by the amalgamated
entity pursuant to clauses (a), (b) and ( c ).
(3) In the case of additional lump sum payment to be made for the purpose of
granting retirement in a group to the employees working in the entity disposed upon
being amalgamated or the entity post the merger pursuant to sub-section (1), tax
deduction shall be made from the payment by giving exemption of fifty percent of the
rate by which tax has to be deducted from the retirement payment (except the
payment to be made through retirement fund or as mentioned in the terms of
conditions of the employee).
(4) If the shareholders existing in the entity being disposed after amalgamation
pursuant to sub-section (1) dispose their shares through sale within two years of such
amalgamation, no capital gain tax shall be levied in the gain earned from such
disposed shares.
(5) No tax shall be levied in dividends distributed to the shareholders existing
at the time of amalgamation of the entity pursuant to sub-section ( 1) within two years
of such amalgamation.
(6) The entity willing to be amalgamated pursuant to subsection ( 1) shall
provide the letter of intent for amalgamation to the Inland Revenue Department not
later than 127the end of Ashad 2078 (14 July 2021).
(7) The entity submitting the letter of intent for amalgamation pursuant to subsection (6) to be amalgamated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall complete the
procedure not later than 128the end of Ashad 2078 (l 4 July 2022).
127Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(8) The entities that are amalgamated after the commencement of this Section
but have not utilized the facility referred to in this Section may also utilize the facility
accordingly.
(9) The provision of this Section shall not be deemed to be applicable to an
entity that does not submit the letter of intent within the time specified in sub-section
(6) and to an entity that does not complete the process of amalgamation within the
date mentioned in sub-section (7).
48. Disposal of property and liability through division: If the rights related with any property
owned by or the burdens related with any liability borne by any person devolve on any
other person also by way of lease of any property or any part thereof, the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) Where the rights or burdens are permanent, that first person shall be deemed to
have disposed any part of that property or liability but not to have acquired any
new property or liability, and
(b) Where the rights or burdens are temporary or contingent, that first person shall
be deemed not to have disposed any part of that property or liability.
Provided that such person shall be deemed to have acquired a new property or
assumed a new liability, as the case may be.
49. Disposal through allocation of incomes and expenses: (1) Any person shall, in the
following circumstances, allocate the expenses or incomes made in acquiring, bearing or
disposing any property or liability between properties and liabilities, on the basis of the
market value at the time of acquisition, bearing or disposal, as the case may be:
(a) Where one or more properties are acquired or one or more liabilities
assumed at the same time,
(b) Where one or more properties or liabilities are disposed at the same time.
(2) If any person who holds ownership of any property or bears any liability
disposes any part of that property or liability, the net expenses or net incomes of that
property or liability immediately before the disposal have to be allocated in the
portion of the disposed property or liability and in the remaining portion, as the case
may be, on the basis of the market value thereof immediately after the disposal.

Chapter-9
Special Provisions Relating to Individual
50. Spouse: (1) Both a resident individual and his/her resident husband or wife may, by
giving a notice in writing, choose to be treated as one individual in any specific income
year for tax purposes.
128Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The husband or wife out of the spouses who choose the provision contained in
sub-section (1) in respect of any income year shall be jointly and severally responsible
between each other for the tax payable by them in that year.
(3)129 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), a resident
widow or widower responsible for bearing dependent shall be deemed as couple.
51. Tax adjustment for medical treatment: (1) Any resident individual may make a claim for
adjustment of tax for medical treatment in any income year for the approved medical
expenditure incurred by himself or through any other person for himself.
(2) The tax adjustment amount for medical treatment of an individual in any
income year shall be computed also by adding any amount, if any, referred to in subsection (4) to the amount to be set by fifteen per cent of the approved medical treatment
expenditure referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the amount of tax
adjustment for medical treatment claimed by an individual in any income year shall not
exceed the prescribed limit.
(4) In the case of any individual in any income year, the excess amounts as
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b), up to the following limit, may be carried forward and be
included in the amount referred to in sub-section (2) in the forthcoming years:
(a) Where the amount referred to in sub-section (2) exceeds the limit referred
to in sub-section (3), the amount of such excess, and
(b) The amount to the extent that the person referred to in clause (a) of Section
3 is not allowed to use tax adjustment for medical treatment because of
being less the amount of tax payable by that person in that year.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "approved medical treatment
expenditure" means the approved medical treatment expenditure as prescribed.

Chapter-10
Special Provisions for Entities
52. Principle of taxation applicable in respect of entities: (1) For purposes of payment of tax,
any entity shall be responsible distinctly from its beneficiaries.
(2) Distributions to be made by an entity shall be as mentioned in Section 53, and
in distribution to be so made, tax shall be imposed on its beneficiaries pursuant to Section
(3) The amounts derived by and expenses borne by an entity shall be deemed to
have been received or borne by the entity irrespective of whether or not the entity has
derived the same or borne expenses for another person.
129Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(4) A property under ownership of an entity and the liability borne by it shall be
deemed to be under ownership or burden of the entity. Such property under ownership
and liability borne shall not be deemed to be under the ownership or burden of any other
person.
(5) Foreign income tax paid by the manager, beneficiary of an entity or the entity,
whosoever, for the income of the entity shall be deemed to have been paid by the entity.
(6) Transactions between any entity and its managers and beneficiaries shall be
recognized subject to Chapter7 and Section 45.
53. Distribution by entity: (1) The following matters have to be included in the distribution
to be made by an entity:
(a) Payment made by the entity to any of its beneficiaries in any capacity, or
(b) Capitalization of profits.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any payment
referred to in clause (a) of that sub-section shall be deemed to have been distributed
only in the following circumstances:
(a) Where the payment exceeds the amount paid by a beneficiary to the entity
in exchange for a consideration likely to be obtained from the entity, and
(b) Where the following amounts are not included in the payment:
(1) The amounts included in computing the income of the beneficiary,
(2) The payments from which tax has been deducted finally except for
reason of distribution.
(3) Only if the distribution of any entity reduces the value of property or
liability of that entity, such distribution shall be deemed to be a distribution of profits
or return of capital.
(4) In any of the following circumstances, a distribution of any entity shall be
deemed to be a distribution of profits, subject to Section 55:
(a) Where the distribution is of a type referred to in sub-section (3) and the
amount as per the market value of the property exceeds the total amount of
capital contribution consisting of the market value of the liability of the
entity at the time of distribution and of capitalized profits, as well,
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Where profits are capitalized.
(5) The distribution referred to in sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a
return of capital to the extent of non-distribution of profits.
(6) The distribution of any entity shall be deemed to be a dividend of that
entity to the extent of non-return of capital.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "capitalization of profits" means
and includes any capitalization made by issuing bonus share or similar other interest
or increasing the paid-up sum of the interest of that entity or crediting the profits to
the premium and capital account of that entity.
54. Tax in dividend: (1) On the dividend distributed by a resident body, it shall be as follows:
(a) 130If dividend is distributed to the shareholder of any company or partner of
any partnership firm, tax shall be imposed as per the mode of final tax
deduction, and
(b) 131No tax shall be imposed on distribution, if any, made by other entities.
(2) The dividend distributed by any non-resident person to any resident
beneficiary shall be included in the income of the beneficiary and tax imposed
accordingly.
(3) 132Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no tax shall be
levied on the dividend received after tax deduction if it is distributed.
(4)133...................
(5) The incomes referred to in Chapter-8 receivable for the interest of a
beneficiary of an entity have to include the amount for capital return made by any
entity for that interest.
Provided that the dividend distributed by the entity is not required to be included.
55. Dissolution of entity: (1) A distribution made in proportion to the portion of profit earned
by and that of capital contributed by any beneficiary in disposing the interests in the
course of dissolution of any entity shall be deemed to be the payment of partial dividend
and partial capital of that entity, if all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) Where any distribution has been made by such entity in respect of
cancellation, release or acceptance of the interest in that entity because of,
inter alia, purchase by the entity of its interest or dissolution of the entity
by following the process oflaw in force,
130Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
131Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
132Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
133Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Where, except in cases of full dissolution, the rights of the beneficiaries in
the portion of profits of that entity have not been computed in proper
portion or could not be computed reasonably, and
(c) Where the beneficiary who gets that distribution is not an associated person
with the entity after the disposal.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the provisions
contained in that sub-section and Section 53 shall not be applicable if any entity
purchases the interest of any beneficiary in the entity through the securities market
recognized under the law in force and makes distribution to that beneficiary.
56. Transaction between entity and beneficiary: (1) If a property is disposed through transfer
of ownership over the property in any manner of distribution between an entity and its
beneficiary or in any other manner subject to Section 45, it shall be as follows:
(a) The transferor of the property shall be deemed to have received, from the
disposal, an amount equal to the market value of the property immediately
before the disposal, and
(b) The transferee of the property shall be deemed to have incurred cost in a
sum equal to that mentioned in clause (a) in acquiring the property.
(2) If any liability is disposed through transfer of the liability between any
entity and its beneficiary subject to Section 45, it shall be as follows:
(a) The transferor of the liability shall be deemed to have incurred cost, in
disposing the liability, in a sum equal to the market value of the liability
immediately before the disposal, and
(b) The transferee of the liability shall be deemed to have received an amount
equal to that mentioned in clause (a) in assuming the liability.
(3) If any entity distributes dividends except profits as dividends to any
beneficiary, the amount of such dividends shall be included in computing the income
of the entity.
Provided that provisions may be made to exclude the matters contained in this
sub-section in any circumstance as prescribed.
57. Change in control: (1) If the ownership of any entity changes by fifty per cent or more as
compared to its ownership until before the last three years, the entity shall be deemed to
have disposed the property under its ownership or the liability borne by it.
(1a)134 For the purpose of computing change in ownership of fifty percent or
more than fifty percent of any entity referred to in sub-section (1), the
following ownership of such entity shall only be included:
(a) Ownership held by a shareholder holding one percent or more than one
percent of the total ownership, and
134Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Ownership held by the associated person of a shareholderholding more
than one percent of the total ownership of such entity, among shareholders
holding less than one percent of the total ownership.
(2) If the ownership of any entity is changed as mentioned in sub-section (l),
the entity shall not be allowed to carry out the following acts after such change:
(a) To deduct interest incurred by that entity prior to the change in ownership
and carried forward pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 14,
(b) To deduct the loss suffered by that entity prior to the change in ownership,
pursuant to Section 20,
(c) To carry back a loss suffered after the change in ownership in any income
(d) To make adjustment pursuant to sub-section ( 4) of Section 24, if it has
been calculated for any amount or expenses pursuant to clause (a) of subsection ( 4) of Section 24 prior to the change in ownership, and correction
has been made on that amount or 136expenses pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 24 after the change in ownership,
(e) To make adjustment pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 25, if any
amount has been calculated pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of

Section 25 prior to the change in ownership and the right to receive that
amount has been relinquished or in the event of that being a debt claim,
such person has written off such amount as a bad debt, after the change in
ownership,
(f) To subtract, pursuant to Section 36, the loss suffered in disposing any
property or liability prior to the change in ownership from the income
earned from the disposal of the property or liability after the change in
ownership,
(g) If premium has been calculated pursuant to sub-clause (1) of clause (b) of
sub-section (4) of Section 60, prior to the change in ownership and such
premium has been returned to the insured after the change in ownership, to
claim for credit accordingly, or
(h) To carry forward in the forthcoming year the tax paid in respect of a
foreign income prior to the change in ownership, pursuant to Sub Section
(3) of Section 71.
(3) If the ownership of any entity changes in any manner mentioned in subsection (1) in any income year, the parts before and after the change in ownership in
that income year shall be treated as separate income years.
135Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
136Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
58. Provision restricting reduction of dividend tax:137(1) An arrangement made by any entity
upon maintaining all of the following arrangements shall be deemed to be an arrangement
made for reducing dividend tax:
(a) Where profit of such entity is reserved, current or expected,
(b) Where any person who acquires an interest of the entity and the recipient
of the interest or his associated person makes any payment to the present
or previous beneficiary of the entity or his associated person irrespective
of whether or not it is related to the acquisition of interest and whether or
not it is made at the time of acquisition of interest,
(c) Where the payment is fully or partly reflected in the profits of the entity,
(d) Where the entity distributes dividends to the recipient of interest and the
profits cover the dividends fully or partly.
(2) If dividends are distributed by any entity under an arrangement reducing
dividend tax made pursuant to sub-section (1), the arrangement shall be deemed to be
as follows:
(a) Payment made by the recipient of interest or his or her associated person
shall not be deemed as payment made by that person but as distribution by
that entity of dividends to the previous or present beneficiary referred to in
clause (b).
(b) Dividends distributed by that entity to the recipient of interest shall be
deemed as equal to a sum to be set by subtracting the amount of payment
said to have been made from the dividends referred to in clause (a).

Chapter-11
Special Provisions on Banking and Insurance Business
59. Banking business: (1) In computing the income or loss made by any person. carrying on
a banking business from that business in any income year, it shall be separately computed
as if the banking business were a business distinct from any other business carried on by
that person.
(la)138 Amount up to five percent of the amount of loan due to be recovered kept
in the risk bearing fund by the person operating banking business and amount managed
for non-banking property shall be deducted as expenses, subject to the standards
prescribed by the Nepal Rastra Bank.
137Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
138Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(1b)139 Amount up to five percent of the amount of loan due to be recovered kept
in the risk bearing fund by a cooperative organization shall be deducted as expenses.
(lc)140 If expenses are accounted from the profits where the risk bearing fund is
maintained pursuant to sub-sections (1 a) and ( 1 b ), the same shall not be remitted, and if
the amount held in such fund is capitalized or profit or dividend is distributed, its hall be
included in the income in the year in which it is distributed .
(2) 141................
(3) 142................
60. General insurance business: (1) In computing the income or loss made by any person
carrying on a general insurance business from that business in any income year, it shall be
separately computed as if the insurance business were a business distinct from any other
business carried on by that person.
(2) In computing the income of any person carrying on the insurance business in
any income year, it shall be done as follows:
(a) In income, in addition to any other amounts required to be included, the
following amounts, as well, have to be included:
(1) Amounts for premium of insurance including premium for reinsurance
received by that person from that business in that year, and
(2) Amounts received in that year from payments referred to in sub-clause
(1) of clause (b) for any contract of reinsurance, security, guarantee or
compensation.
(b) In expenses, in addition to the amounts that can be deducted, the following
amounts, as well, may be deducted:
(1) Payments made by that person as an insurer in operating that business
in that year, and
(2) Premiums included pursuant to sub-clause (1) of clause (a) in
computing the income earned from that business in that year or last
year and returned to the insured in that year.
(3)143 Sum of the following amounts kept in the risk bearing fund:
(a) Amount up to fifty percent of the net insurance cost shown in the
profit and loss account of any year, and
(b) Amount up to one hundred and fifteen percent of the remaining
amount for payment of claim at the end of any year.
139Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
140Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
141Deleted by the Financial Act, 207 5 (2018).
142Deleted by the Financial Act, 207 5 (2018).
143Inserted by the Financial Act, 207 5 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Provided that the amount received as deduction in expenses in
any year pursuant to this sub-clause shall be included in income
incomputing the income of insurance business in forthcoming income
year.
(2) 144..........
(3) 145..........
61. Investment insurance business: (1) In computing the income or loss made by any person
carrying on an investment insurance business from that business in any income year, it
shall be separately computed as if the investment insurance business were a business
distinctrom any other business carried on by that person.
(2) It shall be as follows in computing the income of any personcarrying on the
investment insurance business in any income year, it shall be as follows:
(a) Except the following amounts, other amounts that can be included
pursuant to this Act have to be included:
(1) Amounts reinsurance for premium of insurance including premium
received by that person in operating that business in that income year,
(2) Amounts received in that year from payments referred to in subclause (1) of clause (b) for any contract of reinsurance, security,
guarantee or compensation.
(b) Except the following amounts, other amounts that can be deducted
pursuant to this Act have to be deducted:
(1) Payments made by any person as an insurer in operating that
business, and
(2)146 Premiums referred to in sub-clause (1) of clause (a) returned to
the insured.
(3) The amounts referred to in sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause (a) and subclauses (1) and (2) of clause (b) of sub-section (2) 147shall not be considered as
incomes and expenses for the property or liability of that person.
(4) The investment insurance agreement of investment insurance business of
any person shall not be deemed as the property and liability of that person.
62. Amount received from insurance: (l) For purposes of computing the income of any
person, the provisions contained in Section 31 shall apply in respect of the amount
received by that person from insurance.
144Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
145Deleted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
146Amended by the Financial Amendment Act, 2075 (2018).
147Amended by the Financial Amendment Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the following
provisions shall apply in respect of the profits made from investment insurance:
(a) If a resident person makes payment of such amount, tax shall be
imposed on the insured through final tax deduction, and
(b) If a non-resident person makes payment of such amount, it shall be
computed by including that amount in the income of the insured.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "profits made frominvestment insurance"
means the excess sums of payment received by any person for investment insurance
in respect of that insurance over the premiums paid by that person.

Chapter-12
Special Provisions on Retirement Saving
63.Approval of retirement fund: ( 1) If a resident person who desires to hold a retirement
fund makes an application to the Department for having the retirement fund, the
Department shall give approval as prescribed.
148Provided that such fund as the Citizens Investment Trust formed under the
Citizens Investment Fund Act, 204 7 (1991) or Social Security Fund formed under the
Contribution-Based Social Security Fund Act, 207 4 (2017), if it wishes to maintain a
retirement fund, the Employee Provident Fund formed under the Employee Provident
Fund Act, 2019 (1962) or the Retirement Fund formed under the Retirement Fund Act,
2075(2018) operates a retirement fund, it shall not be required to obtain approval for such
fund.
(2) An individual who is the beneficiary of the retirement fund may make a claim
to have the retirement contribution made to the fund in any income year 149deducted while
computing his income.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the amount claimed by
any person for deduction in any income year pursuant to that sub-section shall not exceed
the prescribed limit of retirement contribution.
64. Tax in retirement fund: (1) For purposes of assessing the income of the retirement fund,
the amounts to be included or deducted pursuant to this Act shall be included or deducted
in computing the income.
Provided that, -
(a) Contributions made to the fund shall not be the income of the fund and
such contributions shall not be included in computation.
148Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
149Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Retirement payments shall not be the expenses of the fund and such
payments shall not be deducted in computing the income.
(c) Interest of any beneficiary in the retirement fund shall not be a liability of
the fund.
(2) No tax shall be levied in the income of the retirement fund.
(3) If any retirement fund ceases to remain in a form of such fund, such fund
has to pay tax at the rate 150mentioned in subsection (1) of Section 2 of Schedule-I by
subtracting the amount referred to in clause (b) from the amount referred to in clause
(a) All retirement contributions paid to the fund between the period from the
date when the fund got approval as a retirement fund and the date when the
recognition ceased to exist and all income amounts treated as taxable
incomes if sub-section (2) is not applicable,
(b) All retirement payments made by the fund between the period from the date
when the fund got approval as a retirement fund and the date when the
recognition ceased to exist.
65. Retirement payments: (l) For the purposes of computing retirement payment income
earned by any individual from the interest 151 based on contribution held in any approved
retirement fund, or 152retirement payment from the Government of Nepal, the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) Retirement payments made by the fund for the interest in the fund have to
be included in the income, and
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), if such payment is made
in lump sum, the payment to be set by subtracting fifty per cent of the paid
amount or five hundred thousand rupees, whichever is higher, from the
amount so paid shall be deemed as the profit made by the person from the
disposal of his non-business taxable assets.
(2) For the purposes of computing the profit made by any individual from the
interest in any retirement fund that has not obtained approval, the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) Where a resident person has made payment, tax shall be imposed on the
beneficiary in that amount as withholding of tax finally, and
(b) Where a non-resident person has made payment, that amount has to be
included in computing the income of the beneficiary.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "profit made from the interest in
any retirement fund that has not obtained approval' means, if retirement
150Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
151Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
152Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
payments made from a retirement fund which has not obtained approval to a
beneficiary individual for his interest in the fund exceed the amounts of
retirement contributions paid by that person to that fund for his interest in the
fund, the amount to the extent of such excess.
153Provided that payment made from any noncontributory fund shall not be
considered as benefit from interest held in the retirement fund not approved.
66. 154........

Chapter-13
International Tax
67. Source of income, loss, profit and payment: (1) If, in the source of income earned from
any employment, business or investment of any person, the amounts mentioned in clause
in (a) exceed the amounts mentioned in clause (b ), the amounts to the extent of such
excess shall be deemed to have source in Nepal.
(a) The amounts with source in Nepal included in computing the income,
(b) The amounts with source in Nepal deducted in computing the income.
(2) If the amounts mentioned in clause (a) exceed the amounts mentioned in
clause (b) in the loss suffered from any employment, business or investment of any
person, the amounts to the extent of such excess shall be deemed to have source in
Nepal.
(a) The amounts with source in Nepal to be deducted in computing the income
of the business or investment,
(b) The amounts with source in Nepal included in computing the income.
(3) The amounts to be included in computing the income be, deemed to have
source in Nepal in the following circumstances:
(a) The net profits referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 7 or
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 9 to be set by subtracting the loss
suffered from the disposal of the property or liability with source in Nepal
from the profit made from the disposal of the property or liability with
source in Nepal,
(b) If a property situated in Nepal or a liability to be borne in Nepal is included,
the profits and amounts to be included in computing the income as
mentioned in clause (d) of sub-section (2) of Section 7 or clause (c) of subsection (2) of Section 9,
153Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
154Repeated by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) Received payments with source in Nepal, subject to clauses (a) and (b).
(4) If a property situated in Nepal or a liability to be borne in Nepal is
included, the source of profit or loss made or suffered from the disposal of the
property or liability shall be deemed to have source in Nepal.
(5) If the following amounts are included in the amounts deducted in
assessing the income, the source of such amounts shall be deemed to be in Nepal:
(a) The amount that can be deducted as cost expenditure mentioned in subsection (1) of Section 15 in respect of the properties situated in Nepal,
(b) The expenses referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 16 in respect of the
properties situated in Nepal, and the expenses to the extent allowed to be
deducted pursuant to Section 19, and
(c) The payments with source in Nepal, subject to clauses (a) and (b).
(6) The following payments shall be deemed to have source in Nepal:
(a) Dividends paid by a resident entity,
(b) Interest paid by a resident person,
(c) Payment for natural resources made m respect of the natural resource
derived from the land situated in Nepal or calculated with reference to such
source,
(d) Rent paid for the use of any property situated in Nepal,
(e) Royalty received by any person for having allowed any one to use any
property situated in Nepal or accepting the right to use the property or the
restriction on the use of such property,
(f) Amount for the general insurance paid by any person in respect of insurance
against risks in Nepal and premium paid to that person for general
insurance,
(g) Payments received by any person as follows by operating inland, sea or air
transport or charter service business in Nepal except as a result of
transshipment:
(1 )The carriage of departing passengers, or
(2)The shipment of mail, livestock or other direct movable property.
(h) Payments received by a person who carries a business of dispatching
information or news through means of communication such as Wife, radio,
optical fiber or satellite in respect of dispatch of news or information
through networks established in Nepal, irrespective of whether or not such
news or information is originated in Nepal,
(Unofficial Translation)
(i) Payments m the following circumstance inclusive of service charges of the
kinds not mentioned in clauses (g) or (h) for doing employment or
rendering service or accepting restriction in those acts:
(l)Where the acts are carried out in Nepal irrespective of the place of
payment, or
(2)Where the Government of Nepal is to make payment irrespective of the
place of 155employment.
(j) Annuities, amount for investment insurance and retirement pension paid by
a resident person, which does not fall under clause (i), and any premium or
other payment paid to the resident person in order to ensure such amounts,
(k) Gifts received in respect of a business or investment operated from the
property situated in Nepal, and (1) The following payments except those
mentioned in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), G) and (k), above:
(1) Payments made in respect of disposal of the property situated in Nepal
or in respect of acquiring liability to be borne in Nepal, or
(2) Payments made in respect of activities carried out in Nepal.
(7) Any income, loss, amount, profit or payment except the one which is
deemed to have source in Nepal as mentioned in the above-mentioned sub-sections,
and the references to Nepal given in this Act shall be applicable as if they were used
in the case of any particular foreign country for purposes of ascertaining as to which
country such income, loss, amount, profit or payment has source in.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Property situated in Nepal" means the land or buildings situated in
Nepal and the property other than land or building of a resident person
situated in any foreign country or if the person is associated with a
controlled foreign entity pursuant to Section 69, inclusive his interest in that
entity.
(b) "Liability to be borne in Nepal" means the liability of a resident person.
68. Foreign permanent establishments: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3,
any foreign permanent establishment of a non-resident person situated in Nepal shall be
liable to pay tax payable on the income of such establishment, subject to other provisions
of this Act.
(2) The income of a person having ownership of a foreign permanent
establishment shall be separated from the income of that establishment, pursuant to

Section 69.
155Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(3) Tax shall be imposed on the permanent establishment referred to in clause (b)
of Section 3 in the income sent abroad by the foreign permanent establishment of a nonresident person situated in Nepal.
(4) The income sent abroad in any income year by the foreign permanent
establishment of a non-resident person situated in Nepal shall be equal to the amount of
dividends distributed by that foreign permanent establishment in that year.
69. Controlled foreign entities: (1) If any entity distributes dividends of the associated
income earned in any income year as a controlled foreign entity at the end of the income
year, it shall be deemed tohave distributed dividends on proportion to its beneficiaries, as
follows:
(a) As per the rights of the beneficiaries to the income in distributing
dividends, or
(b) If the rights are not certain in a reasonable manner, as per the method
which the Department thinks proper according to the circumstance.
(2) Tax shall not be levied on the dividends distributed by an entity as a
controlled foreign entity at the end of any income year except those distributed
pursuant to sub-section (1).
(3) The following shall be deemed to have occurred in respect of the dividends
distributed by a controlled foreign entity pursuant to sub-section (1) to the
beneficiaries associated with that entity at the time of distribution of dividends:
(a) Having the characteristic equivalent to the type and source of the
associate income of that entity, and
(b) Having distributed proportionately out of each type and source the
associate income of that entity.
(4) Any tax paid by any controlled foreign entity including that deemed to be
paid pursuant to sub-section (5), or sub-section (5) of Section 52 in respect of the
amounts deemed to be distributed pursuant to sub-section (3) has to be set aside for
the beneficiary associated with that entity.
(5) The tax set aside pursuant to sub-section (4) at the time of allocation shall
be deemed to have been paid by the beneficiary, and the beneficiary may get facility
of tax adjustment for such tax, as provided for in Section 71.
(6) The amount to be deemed as distributed to the beneficiary pursuant to subsection (1) at the time of distribution has to be included in the expenses for any
property or liability of the recipient beneficiary in the entity making such distribution.
(7) The dividends distributed to the beneficiary enjoying tax exemption
pursuant to sub-section (2) at the time of distribution has to be included in the income
for any property or liability of the recipient beneficiary as an interest in the entity
making such distribution.
(Unofficial Translation)
(8) For purposes of this Act, the foreign income tax paid or foreign income tax
deemed as paid by any controlled foreign entity pursuant to sub-section (5), or subsection (5) of Section 52 shall be deemed as tax amount paid by that entity or deemed
to be paid by that entity pursuant to this Act.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Associated income" means, m computing taxable income of any
controlled foreign entity in any income year, a taxable income computed as
if that entity were a resident entity.
(b) "Controlled foreign entity" means any non-resident entity in which any
resident person has interest directly or indirectly through one or more
interposed non-resident entities in any income year; and where that person
is associated with that entity or where any person deemed to be associated
with and any other resident persons not exceeding four persons are
associated with that entity, it includes such entity, as well.
70. Tax chargeable on non-resident person providing water traveling/rafting, air transport or
telecommunications service in Nepal: (1) The taxable income of any non-resident person
who operates water traveling/rafting, charter service or air transport in any income year
shall consist of the amounts derived from the following acts except the amounts derived
from transshipment in that year:
(a) Carriage of passengers departing from Nepal, or
(b) Carriage of the mail, animals or goods dispatched from Nepal.
(2) The taxable income of any non-resident person who carries on a business
of cable, radio, optical fiber or satellite communication in any income year shall
consist of the amounts derived from the dispatch of news or information through any
device established in Nepal, whether originated in Nepal or not.
(3) Tax shall be levied on the amounts to be included in the taxable income of
any non-resident person pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), at the rate specified in subsection (7) of Section 2 of Schedule-I.
Provided that-
(a) Those amounts need not to be computed in computing the tax payable in
respect of any due taxable income of that person,
(b) The expenses related with computation of those amounts shall not be
allowed to be deducted in computing that due taxable income, and
(c) That person shall not be entitled to any facility of tax adjustment from
the amount of tax payable by that person.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "non-resident person" means a resident
entity within the group of associated entities with head offices outside Nepal.
(Unofficial Translation)
71. Foreign tax adjustment: (1) Any resident person may claim for adjustment of tax for the
foreign income tax paid by that person in any income year to the extent of the tax paid for
assessable foreign income of that person in that year.
(2) When computing the foreign tax adjustment claimed pursuant to sub-section
(1), it shall be done as follows:
(a) Separate computation has to be done for assessable foreign income
having source in each country, and
(b) Foreign tax adjustment claim shall not be made, m respect of the
assessable foreign income, at the rate of tax higher than the average rate of
tax of Nepal payable by that person in that year in respect of each
computation.
(3) Any foreign income tax paid in respect of the assessable foreign income of
any year who is not entitled to foreign tax adjustment facility pursuant to sub-section
(1) by virtue of the limit provided for in clause (b) of sub-section (2) may be dealt
with as follows:
(a) It may be carried forward in the coming year, and
(b) It shall be deemed to be paid in respect of the assessable foreign income
in the future income year of the person having source in the country where
such foreign income has been earned.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any person may
give up a claim for foreign tax adjustment to which he is entitled in any income year
and also claim for credit for foreign income tax for which such adjustment facility is
available in that year.
'Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Assessable foreign income" means the following income to be included in
the assessable income earned by any resident person in any income year from
any employment, business or investment:
(1) Income earned from a foreign source, or
(2) Income of a non-resident person deemed as distributed to that resident
person under Section 69 irrespective of the source.
(b) 156"Average rate of tax of Nepal" means the rate resulted from division of
tax amount to be paid by the person referred to in clause (a) of Section 3 in
any income year, prior to adjustment of any foreign tax of that person in that
year, by his taxable income of that year and multiplication by one hundred.
156Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-14
Tax Administration and Authentic Documents
72. Department: (1) The Department shall be responsible for the implementation and
administration of this Act.
(2)157 The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
establish large taxpayer office, medium level taxpayer office, Inland Revenue office or
taxpayer service offices under the Department and prescribe their working areas, in order
to render assistance in fulfilling the responsibility of the Department mentioned in subsection (1) The offices of which working areas have been so specified shall be deemed as
organs of the Department.
(3) The Department may have the officers and other employees as follows:
(a) Director General,
(b) Deputy Director General, Chief Tax Administrator, Director, Chief Tax
Officer, Tax Officer and other officer in the required number, and
(c) Other employees.
(4) The Director General may carry out the following functions, subject to the
direction given by the Government of Nepal:
(a) To exercise any of the powers conferred on the Department pursuant to
this Act,
(b) To so delegate the powers referred to in clause (a) as to be exercisable
by any other officer subject to subsections (5) and (6),
(c) To so specify that all or any of the powers referred to in clause (a),
except the power to issue public circular pursuant to Section 75, to
specify the document referred to in Section 77, to hold any reviewable
decision or otherwise affect it pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section
115, to accept or reject, fully or partly, the matters contained in an
application made by any person pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section
115, to make addition by adding offence pursuant to Section 129 or to
grant authority to any officer pursuant to Section 82, to be exercisable
by any officer employee of the civil Service.
(5) Deputy Director General, Chief Tax Administrator, Director, Chief Tax
Officer and Tax Officer who acts as the Chief of Office may carry out the following
functions, subject to the direction given by the Government of Nepal or the Director
General:
(a) To exercise the powers conferred on the Department pursuant to this
Act, other than the power to issue public circular pursuant to Section
75, to specify the document referred to in Section 77, to hold any
157Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
reviewable decision or otherwise affect it pursuant to sub-section (5) of

Section 115, to accept or reject, fully or partly, the matters contained in
an application made by any person pursuant to sub-section (7) of

Section 115, to make addition by adding offence pursuant to Section
129, and
(b) To so delegate such powers as to be exercisable by any other officer of
the Department subject to sub-section (6).
(6) Any other officer of the department except the Director General, Deputy
Director General, Chief Tax Administrator, Director, Chief Tax Officer or Tax
Officer who acts as the Chief of Office may carry out the following functions:
(a) To exercise any powers delegated to that officer out of the powers
conferred on the department, except the following powers:
(1) To issue public circular pursuant to Section 75, to specify the
document referred to in Section 77, to hold any reviewable decision or
otherwise affect it pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 115, to accept
or reject, fully or partly, the matters contained in an application made
by any person pursuant to subsection (7) of Section 115, to make
addition by adding offence pursuant to Section 129, or
(2) To grant authorization to any officer pursuant to Section 82 or issue
a notice pursuant to Section 109.
(b) He shall not be entitled to re-delegate any power delegated to him.
73. International agreements: (1) If any income of any person is taxable pursuant to this Act
or the laws in force and the same income is alsotaxable in a foreign country, the
Government of Nepal may conclude an international agreement with the foreign country
for the avoidance of double taxation.
(2) This sub-section shall be applicable if, pursuant to any international agreement
concluded with Nepal, the competent authority of the other country requests the
Department to collect in Nepal the amount payable by any person who is in arrears of that
amount, pursuant to the taxation law of that other country.
(3) If sub-section (2) is applicable, the Department may, for the purpose of
sending that amount to that competent authority, send a notice in writing to the person
who is in arrears of tax and require him to pay such amount to the Department within the
date mentioned in that notice.
(4) This sub-section shall be applicable if any international agreement contains a
provision under which Nepal has to exempt income or payment or has to apply the
reduced tax rate to income or payment.
(5) If sub-section (4) is applicable, any of the following entity shall not be entitled
to enjoy tax exemption or tax deduction facility:
(a) An entity who is considered as a resident of the other party of the agreement for
purposes of the agreement, and
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Where fifty percent or more portion of the vested ownership of that entity is
owned by individuals or by the entities in which any individual has no interest and,
for purposes of the agreement, the persons or entities are residents of both Nepal and
of the other country party to the agreement.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "international agreement' means any treaty
or agreement containing the following provisions, concluded with any foreign
government and applicable to Nepal:
(a) To avoid double taxation and prevent fiscal evasion, or
(b) To render reciprocal administrative assistance in the
implementation of tax liability.
74. Taxpayer's rights:158(1)The taxpayer shall fulfill the duties referred to this Act.
(2) In the context of paying tax pursuant to this Act, the taxpayer shall have
the following rights:
(a) The right to be treated with honor,
(b) The right to receive information on tax related matters pursuant to the
laws in force,
(c) The right to have an opportunity to furnish proofs in defense on tax
related matters,
(d) The right to appoint a legal practitioner or auditor for defense, and
(e) The right to have tax related secret matters inviolable except as
otherwise mentioned in this Act.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "taxpayer" means a person on
whom tax is imposed and collected as mentioned in Section 3.
75. Public circular: (1) In order to bring about uniformity in the implementation of this Act
and simplify tax administration and give guidelines to the officers of the Department as
well as the persons affected by this Act, the Department may issue written public
circulars, accompanied by explanations, on the provisions made in this Act.
(2) The Department shall make available the circular issued pursuant to subsection (1) in the Department or in any other places as per necessity or through any other
means.
(3) The Department shall be compelled to take action according to the circular
issued pursuant to sub-section (1) unless and until such circular is revoked.
76. Advance ruling: (1) If any person makes an application in writing to the Department for
the removal of any confusion as to the application of this Act to any arrangement
158Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
proposed or accepted by such person, the Department may issue its version by an advance
ruling as prescribed, by notifying the person in writing.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), · the Department shall
not be entitled to issue an advance ruling referred to in sub-section (1) on any matter of
confusion occurred in the implementation of this Act if such matter is sub judice in the
court or has already been decided by the court.
(3) If any person acts as follows prior to the issuance of an advance ruling
pursuant to sub-section (1), the Department shall be compelled to implement this Act as
per that ruling until the ruling issued to that person remains valid:
(a) If the full and actual statements of the matter related to that ruling are
presented to the Department, and
(b) If the arrangement corresponds to the point mentioned in the application
made by that person for the ruling.
(4) If the public circular issued pursuant to Section 75 and the advance ruling
issued pursuant to sub-section (l) are mutually contradictory, priority shall be given to
the matters mentioned in the advance ruling in the case of the person to whom such
ruling has been issued.
(5) Prior to the issuance of the advance ruling pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Department may give an opportunity to the applicant to furnish further statements, if
any, in person or through his representative.
77. Format of documents: (1)The Department may, from time to time, so specify the mode of
submission and formats of necessary documents, statements including income returns, tax
deduction statements and formats of records that are required under this Act and the rules
framed under this Act, the notices, information and details required for the effective
implementation of this Act are incorporated.
(2) The Department shall make available the formats referred to in sub-section (1)
in the Department and in any other places specified by the Department and through any
other means.
(3)159 The Department may so prescribe that information or return or documents to
be submitted by any person to the Department have to be submitted through electronic
means.
78. Permanent account number:160(1) The Department shall, subject to this Act, issue a
permanent account number to any person for the purpose of identifying that person.
Provided that the entity may provide such permanent account number upon
completion of the procedure under this Act upon approval from the Department. The taxpayer
receiving the permanent account number issued as such cannot operate transaction of import,
export till the period as prescribed by the Department.
159Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
160Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The Department may order any person to mention his or her permanent
account number in any income return, statement, version or other document to be
used for purposes of this Act.
(3)161 The Department may specify the circumstances where any person has to
show or mention his permanent account number.
(4)162 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the person
referred to in sub-section (3) shall obtain a permanent account number prior to
making any transaction.
(4a)163A person making transactions by obtaining a permanent account
number pursuant to sub-section (4) shall update such details of registration as
specified by the Department in the biometric system within the prescribed period.
(5)164 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), (2), (3) or ( 4),
no person shall be free from tax obligation for the reason that he has not obtained a
permanent account number.
78A. 165Suspenson of Permanent Account Number: ( 1) Department has power to suspend
Permanent Account Number if any one of the following situations:
(a) leave business transaction,
(b) in case of entity, close down, sale or transfer of such entity or non-existence
of business any other reason,
(c) the demise of owner in case of proprietorship business,
(d) registered by mistake.
(2) Other process of Suspension of Permanent Account Number shall be as
prescribed.
79. Service of documents: (1) Any document required to be given or delivered to any person
pursuant to this Act shall be deemed to have been given or delivered to that personin the
following circumstances:
(a)166 Where it is sent to the telefax, telex, email or such other electronic
medium of that person,
(b) Where it is delivered in-person to whom it has to be delivered or deliver
to his representative or his office staff; to the manager of an entity or
his assigned representative or staffs in the case of the entity.
161Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
162Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
163Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
164Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
165Inserted by the Financial Act,2077(2020).
166Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) Where it is sent by a registered post to his resident, office, business or
other address to the extent known.
(2) Any document so signed, encrypted or encoded through computer
technology or written in it as indicating the name and designation of the competent
authority of the Department and issued, served or given pursuant to this Act shall be
deemed to have met requirements.
(3)167 If a document cannot be served pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2),
information thereof may be given by broadcasting or publishing a notice of the related
order by radio, television or in any newspaper of national circulation, in the name of
the concerned person. Information so give shall be deemed to have been received by
the concerned person.
80. Defective documents: (l)Any document issued under this Act shall not be deemed
defective in the following circumstances:
(a) Where it is consistent with this Act substantially, and
(b) Where the person who is addressed in a document is normally indicated
in the document.
(2) If any document issued by the Department pursuant to this Act contains
any error and the error does not give rise to any dispute as to the interpretation of this
Act or the fact of any specific person, the Department may make amendment in the
document for purposes of rectifying such error.

Chapter-15
Records and Information collection
81. To maintain records or documents: (1) Each person who is liable to pay tax pursuant to
this Act has to maintain in Nepali the following necessary documents, in addition to the
documents required to be maintained in the format or type as prescribed by the
Department or to be certified or authenticated by audit or in other manner:
(a) Necessary information and documents supporting the income returns or
any other documents required to be submitted to the Department
pursuant to this Act,
(b) Documents assisting to assess the tax payable by him,
(c) Documents supporting the deduction of expenses.
167Inserted by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) Except as otherwise specified by the Department by issuing a notice in
writing, the documents referred to in this Section have to be safely retained for 168......
five years from the date of expiration of the concerned income year.
(3) If any document referred to in sub-section (1) is not in the Nepali or
English language, the Department may, by issuing a notice in writing, require the
concerned person to submit the translated version of such document in the Nepali
language done, at such person's own cost, by a recognized translator under the law in
force.
(4)169 The Department may, upon prescribing the standards and procedures,
give approval to any person to issue invoices through electronic means and to keep
the documents required to be kept under sub-section ( 1) through electronic means.
82. Powers of Department to obtain information: (1) The officer of the Department may do
the following in order to implement this Act:
(a) To have full or unhindered access to any premises, places, documents or
properties situated in Nepal, subject to the laws in force,
(b) To obtain any portion of or duplicate copy of the document including an
electronic copy of the documents to which there is an access pursuant
to clause (a),
(c) If the concerned officer thinks that the document to which there is an
access pursuant to clause (a) is an evidence that could be necessary to
assess tax liability of any person pursuant to this Act, to take such
document in his custody, and
(d) If any person having access to any document who is requested to
provide a duplicate copy of such document does not provide it, and the
officer thinks that such document is kept in any property in any form,
to take such property in own custody in order to have access to such
document.
(2) No officer shall be entitled to exercise the powers referred to in sub-section
( 1) without having authority in writing from the Department. If, in entering any
premise or place in exercise by any officer of the powers referred to in sub-section
(1), the possessor of such premise or place or the person having access to any
concerned document or property requests to show the authority of the Department,
such officer has to show such authority to them.
(3) If any officer of the Department who enters any premise or place in
exercise of the powers referred to in sub-section (1) so requests, the possessor of such
premise or place or the person having access to any concerned document or property
has to provide all proper facilities and assistance for the effective use of the powers.
(4) The Department may hold in its custody the document or property taken in
its custody pursuant to clause (c) or (d) of subsection (1) until the following time.
168Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
169Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) In the case of any document taken in custody pursuant to clause (c) of
sub-section (1) until the time the document is required to assess tax
liability of any person or for any other action pursuant to this Act, and
(b) In the case of any property taken in custody pursuant to clause (d) of
sub-section (1), until the time when access to the document in question
is gained and it is taken in custody.
(5) The person whose document is taken in custody pursuant to sub-section (4)
may inspect such document and may obtain a copy of or copy down a portion of such
document at his own cost within office hours and under supervision as prescribed by
the Department.
(6) Notwithstanding any provision made on privilege or public interest in
respect of having access to the documents required for the implementation of this Act,
the provisions contained in this Section shall apply in that respect.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "possessor" means, in respect of
any premise or place, a person having ownership of, manager of the premise or place
or any other person remaining there.
83. Power to obtain information by notice: (1) The Department may, by giving a notice in
writing, order any person with or without liability to pay tax pursuant to this Act to do as
follows:
(a) To submit any information specified in the notice within the time
specified in the notice, also by preparing any document,
(b) To be present at the Department in the place and time specified in the
notice before the officer of the Department for inspection on the tax
related matters of that person or any other person,
(c) To submit, for purposes of inspection, any document mentioned in the
notice that is under his control at the time when that person is
examined pursuant to clause (b).
(2) Any person who is to be examined pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1)
shall have the right to have legal or other representation during such examination.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision made on any privilege or on public interest
in respect of having access to the documents required for the implementation of this
Act, the provisions contained in this Section shall apply in that respect.
84. Governmental secrecy: (1) Any officer and other employee of the Department shall
maintain secrecy of all documents and information that come to his custody or knowledge
in the course of carrying out his duty pursuant to this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any officer of the
Department may disclose, as follows, the document or information referred to in subsection (1) to the following persons:
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) To the extent that it is necessary to carry out the duty of that officer
pursuant to this Act,
(b) If it is so ordered by any court or tribunal in respect of administrative
review or action pursuant to this Act,
(c) Before the Minister for Finance,
(d) If it is necessary to disclose for purposes of any other financial law,
(e) If it is necessary for any person in the service of the Government of
Nepal for any acts relating to revenue or statistics, before such a
person,
(f) If it is necessary in the course of carrying out the duty, before the
Auditor General or any person authorized by the Auditor General, or
(g) Before the competent authority of the government of any country with
which the Government of Nepal has concluded an international
agreement, to the extent as provided for in such agreement in that
respect.
(3) Any person, court, tribunal, body or official who obtains any document or
information pursuant to sub-section (2) shall keep secret such document or
information except to the minimum extent required.

Chapter-16
Payment of Tax
85. Time, place and mode of payment of tax: (1) Tax required to be paid under this Act has to
be paid in the place and mode as prescribe 170and the Department may so prescribe that
tax to be so paid has to be paid also through electronic means.
(2) Tax required to be paid under this Act has to be paid in the following time,
subject to sub-section (1):
(a) In the case of one who has to pay by withholding advance tax, in the
time mentioned in sub-section (4) of Section 90,
(b) In the case of one who has to pay tax in installments, in the time
mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 94,
(c) In the case of one who has to pay the assessed tax-
(1) On the date when the income return is to be submitted in respect of
assessment of tax referred to in Section 99,
170Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) Within the time limit as specified in the tax assessment notice
delivered pursuant to Section 102 in respect of tax assessed pursuant to
sub-section (2) of Section 100,
(3) Within the time limit as specified in the tax assessment notice
delivered pursuant to Section 102 in respect of amended tax
assessment made pursuant to Section 101,
(d) In respect of the amounts required to be paid to the Department as per
any notice issued pursuant to subsection (8) of Section 104, subsection (1) of Section 109, or sub-section (1) of Section 110, on the
date mentioned in the notice,
(e) In respect of a liability fixed upon failure of any entity to pay tax
pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 107, at the same time when the
entity has to pay tax,
(f) In respect of the amounts required pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4) of

Section 108, within seven days of the date on which the amounts are
adjusted by auction sale gradually or on which the amounts cannot be
so adjusted, and
(g) In respect of the fees and interest assessed pursuant to Section 122, on
the date as mentioned in the assessment notice.
(3) The date on which tax has to be paid shall not be affected in the following
circumstances:
(a) An action taken by the Department pursuant to Chapter20 to recover
tax, or
(b) Other action has commenced, pursuant to this Act.
86. Evidence of payable tax: The certificate signed by the officer of the department,
indicating the name, address of any person and the amount of tax required to be paid by
that person shall be an ample evidence for the amount of tax required to be paid by that
person, in the following actions:-
(a) Any action taken by the Department pursuant to Chapter-20 to recover tax, or
(b) Any action on any offense pursuant to Chapter-23.

Chapter-17
Withholding on Payment
87.Withholding of tax by employer: (1) When making payment which has source in Nepal
and is to be included in computing the income derived by any employee or worker, each
resident employer shall deduct (withhold) tax at the rate referred to in Schedule-I.
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The liability of an employer required to withhold tax pursuant to sub-section (1)
shall not decrease or end by virtue of the following:
(a) If the employer has the right or duty to deduct or hold up or subtract
any other amount from the said payment, or
(b) If the income earned by the employee or worker from employment
cannot be subtracted pursuant to other laws in force.
88.Withholding of tax in making payment for investment return andservice charge: (1) When
making payment by a resident person for interest, natural resource, rent, royalty,
171service charge, commission, sales bonus, retirement payment and other any
consideration having source in Nepal, and in making payment of amount of any
retirement payment, the person shall withhold tax at the rate of fifteen percent of the total
amount of payment.
172Provided that tax shall be withheld in the following payment, at the following rate:
(1) In case of retirement payment from the Government of Nepal or
contribution-based retirement payment from the approved retirement
fund, at the rate of five percent in benefit computed under clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 65,
(2) In a commission paid by the resident employment company to nonresident person, at the rate of five percent,
(3) In payment of amount for lease of aircraft, at the rate of ten percent,
(4) In service charge paid to service provider resident person registered in
value added tax or resident entity operating transaction of exemption of
value added tax, at the rate of one and half percent of payment amount,
(5) Rent payment made by a resident person in a source in Nepal, at the
rate often percent,
Provided that,
(a) In an amount payment to a person, registered in valued added tax,
operating business of providing vehicles in rent, for a rent of such
vehicles, one and half percent shall be withheld from such amount.
(b) No tax shall be withheld in an amount received by individual for
house rent.
(c) 173.....
(6) In an amount payment as a consideration distributed to individual by
mutual fund, at the rate of five percent,
171Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
172Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
173Deleted by Financial Act 2077 (2020)
(Unofficial Translation)
(7) In a payment for use of satellite, bandwidth, optical fiber, tools related
to communication or electricity transmission line, at the rate of ten
percent,
(8) Payment for carriage service and vehicle provide in rent for carriage
service at the rate of two and half percent.
174Provided that at the rate of one and half percent will be charged
in case of carriage service provider and vehicle rent for carriage
service provider who are registered in value add tax.
175(9) In a interest payment by resident bank and financial institutions to
the loan received in foreign currency from foreign Banks to invest in
the areas as specified by Nepal Rasta bank, at the rate of ten percent.
176(10) Tax shall not be withheld in tax incentive amount for consumer
who paid their bill through electronic payment instruments like
payment card, e-money(wallet), mobile banking on their purchase.
(2)177 A resident person shall, in making following payment having source in
Nepal, withhold tax at the following rate:
(a) In a dividend payment, at the rate of five percent of paid amount,
(b) In a benefit payment of investment insurance, at the rate of five percent
of paid amount, or
(c) In a benefit payment from unapproved retirement fund, at the rate of
five percent of paid amount
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in making payment
to any individual of interest or of an amount in the form of interest as follows, in
consideration for deposits, bonds, debentures an government bonds, a resident bank,
financial institution, cooperative organization or any other body issuing bonds or
company enlisted under the prevailing law shall withhold tax at the rate of five
percent of the total amount of payment:
(a) Which has source in Nepal, and
(b) Which is not related with the operation of business.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), this
Section shall not apply to the following payment:
(a) 178Any other payment other than that related to the operation of a
business by an individual,
174 Inserted by Financial Act 2077 (2020)
175 Inserted by Financial Act 2077 (2020)
176 Inserted by Financial Act 2077 (2020)
177Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(al)179 Payment for write-up, article in a newspaper,
(b) Interest paid to a resident bank or other resident financial
institution,
(c) Payment enjoying tax exemption or payment liable to tax
withholding pursuant to Section 87,
(d)180 Inter-regional interchange charge paid to the bank issuing the
credit card,
(e)181 Dividend and interest paid to a mutual fund.
88A.182 Tax withholding in windfall gain: (1) Tax shall be withheld at the rate of twenty-five
percent in making a payment for a windfall gain.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, provide exemption from levying wind-fall gain tax on national and
international award for contribution made to literature, art, culture, sports, journalism,
science, technology and public administration.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no tax shall be levied
on national and international award of up to five hundred thousand rupees for
contribution made to literature, art, culture, sports, journalism, science, technology and
public administration.
89. Tax withholding in making payment of deed or contract:183(1) In making payment of a
sum exceeding fifty thousand rupees for payment of deed or contract, a resident person
shall withhold tax at the rate of one and half percent of the total amount of payment.
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be fixed also by adding any
other payments, if any, made by such person or his associated person under the same
contract to the person or his associated person entitled to payment under that contract in
the past ten days.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), tax shall be withheld
as follows from payment made by any resident person to any non-resident person under
any contraction or contract:
(a) 184……..Deed or contract, five percent,
(b) 185For a commission in payment of a premium to a nonresident insurance
company or a premium amount received for reinsurance from a non-resident
insurance company, one and half percent,
178Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
179Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
180Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
181Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
182Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
183Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
184Deleted by the Financial Act,2077(2020).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) 186Where the Department has given that resident person a notice in writing
except as referred to in clause (a) or (b), at the rate specified in the notice.
(3a)187Tax shall be withheld at the rate of one and half percent from payment
of amount exceeding five million rupees for a work to be performed by a consumers'
committee.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), this Section shall
not apply to the following payments:
(a)188 Any other payment except rent paid for a land or house having source in
Nepal or goods and equipment installed in the house to an individual other
than that operating a business,
(b)189 Payments enjoying tax exemption or payments liable to tax withholding
pursuant to Section 87, 88 or 88A.
Explanation:190 For the purpose of this Section "deed or contract" means a
contract or agreement concluded for the supply of any goods or labors or construction,
installation or establishment of tangible property or structure and such act as specified
to be a deed or contract by the Department, and such contract or agreement also
includes payment for the service related to construction, installation or establishment,
if such service is also covered by it.
90. Statement and payment of tax withheld:191 (1) Each person who has to withhold tax has
to submit to the Department a statement in such mode and format as specified by the
Department within twenty-five days of the expiration of each month.
(2) The person withholding tax shall pay to the Department the amount of tax
withheld or deemed to be withheld pursuant to sub-section (3), along with the statement
referred to in sub-section (1), within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Even though the person liable to withhold tax has not withheld tax pursuant to
192Sections 87, 88, 88A. or 89, the tax shall be deemed to be withheld at the time when it
has to be withheld.
(4) The person withholding tax shall pay the amount of tax withheld pursuant to
193Sections 87, 88, 88A. or 89 or deemed to be withheld pursuant to sub-section (3); and
185Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
186Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
187Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
188Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
189Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
190Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
191Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
192Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
193Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
if sub-section (5) is applicable, the person subject to tax withholding shall pay the tax
194within twenty-five days after the period referred to in sub-section (1).
(4a)195 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4)196,the person
paying tax on the basis of transaction pursuant to sub-section ( 4a) of Section 4 of the
Act shall pay the tax withheld under Chapter-17 at the time of payment of the
installment tax.
(5)197 In the following circumstances, the person subject to withholding tax and
the person withholding tax shall be jointly and individually responsible to pay such tax
amount to the Department:
(a) If the person withholding tax does not withhold tax from any payment
pursuant to 198Section 87, 88, 88A. or 89, and
(b) If the person withholding tax does not pay to the Department the amount of
tax deemed to be withheld pursuant to sub-section (3) within the date on which
tax has to be paid pursuant to sub-section (4).
(6) If the person withholding tax withholds tax and pays it to the Department
pursuant to 199Section 87, 88, 88A.or 89 and the person subject to tax withholding
makes any claim as to that payment subject to tax withholding, that amount shall be
treated as if it were paid to the person subject to tax withholding.
(7) If the person withholding tax pays to the Department the amount of tax not
withheld pursuant to 200Sections 87, 88, 88A. or 89, he may recover the amount equal
to the amount of tax so paid from the person subject to tax withholding.
(8)201 If the Department believes that any person has not submitted a return or
paid tax to be submitted or paid under subsection (1) or (2) or there exists the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (5) in the case ofany person, it may issue an
order to pay the amount not paid or the amount paid less and the interest referred to in

Section 119 202and charge subject to section 120 shall be levied if any person make
payment without tax deduction at source.
Provided that, prior to issuing such an order, a written notice setting out an
appropriate reason, shall be given to submit evidence in defense in respect of such
order, within the time-limit of fifteen days.
91. Tax withholding certificate: (1) The person withholding tax shall provide the tax
withholding certificate, as follows, to the person subject to tax withholding at the time
specified in sub-section (2):
194Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
195Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
196Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
197Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
198Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
199Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
200Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
201Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
202 Inserted by Financial Act 2077 (2020)
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) Having been certified in accordance with the manner, if any, as prescribed
by the Department,
(b) Setting out the amount of tax withheld pursuant to 203Section 87, 88, SSA. or
89 and the paid amounts.
(2) The tax withholding certificate setting out the period of tax withholding
has to be provided 204within twenty-five days from the date of expiration of the month
in which tax is withheld.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if tax is withheld
pursuant to Section 87, the tax withholding certificate has to be provided as follows:
(a) The certificate shall be valid only for the period when the employee
continues to serve in that income year.
(b) The certificate has to be provided within thirty days from the expiration of
that year or if the employee leaves employment in the person withholding
the tax in that year, it has to be provided within thirty days from the date of
his leaving employment.
92. Payment from which tax is withheld finally: (1) The following payments shall be treated
as payments from which tax is withheld finally:
(a) Dividend paid by a resident 205company or partnership firm,
(b) Rent paid for the land or building and fixtures and equipment appurtenant
thereto having source in Nepal to other individual except one who is
carrying on business,
(c) 206Profit paid by a resident person for investment insurance,
(d) Profit paid by a resident person for the interest of an unapproved retirement
fund,
(e) 207Interest as follows paid by a bank, financial institution or any other entity
issuing bonds (debentures) or company enlisted under prevailing law or
cooperative organization mentioned in sub-section (3) of Section 88:
(1) Payment made to an individual not having source in Nepal and not
related to operation of business,
(2) Payment made to the organization entitled to enjoy exemption pursuant
to clause (o) of Section 2.
(f) Payment subject to tax withholding made to a non-resident person pursuant
to 208Section 87, 88, 88A. or 89.
203Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
204Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
205Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
206Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
207Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(g) 209All kinds of retirement payment, including that paid by the Government of
Nepal or approved retirement fund or unapproved retirement fund (except
regularly paid pension),
(h) 210Meeting allowance up to twenty thousand rupees per meeting, payment
for teaching every time, making question paper or examining answer sheets,
(i) 211Payment for a windfall gain,
(j)212Amount of consideration to be distributed to individuals from a mutual
fund,
(k) 213Payment for rent of a motor vehicle or carriage service of an individual
except a private firm.
(2) If the person withholding tax or the person subject to tax withholding pays
to the Department the amount of tax withheld from the payment from which tax is
withheld finally pursuant to 214Section 87, 88, 88A. or 89 or the amount of tax deemed
to have been withheld pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 90, the person referred to
in clause ( c) of Section 3 shall be deemed to have fulfilled the tax liability.
93. Adjustment facility and inclusion of tax not to be withheld finally: (1) If any tax is
withheld from any payment for purposes of computing the amount of such payment, such
tax-withheld amount shall be treated as a portion of that payment.
(2) If any tax is withheld from any payment except the payment from which tax is
withheld finally, the person subject to tax withholding shall be deemed to have paid the
amount of tax as follows:
(a) The amount of tax withheld from payment pursuant to Section 87, 88 or 89,
(b) If the person withholding tax or the person subject to tax withholding pays to
the Department the amount of tax referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 90
or the amount of tax deemed to have been withheld from payment, such
amount.
(3) The person subject to tax withholding may make a claim for adjustment of
the amount referred to in sub-section (2) only to the amount of tax payable in the
income year in which that payment is made.
208Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
209Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
210Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
211Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
212Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
213Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
214Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-18
Installment and215Advance Tax
94. Payment of tax in installment:216 (1) A person who has or will have assessable income in
any income year from any business or investment has to pay tax in three installments as
follows:
Date on which payment is to be made Amount to be paid
By the end of Poush (mid-January)
Amount to be paid from forty percent of the
estimated tax amount
By the end of Chaitra (mid-April)
Amount to be paid from seventy percent of
the estimated tax amount
By the end of Ashad (mid-July)
Amount to be paid from hundred percent of
the estimated tax amount
Explanation: For purposes of this sub-section, -
(a) "Estimated tax" means the estimated tax m installment computed by any person
liable to pay tax m installment pursuant to Section 95 at the time when the
installment tax is to be paid in any year.
(b) "Tax to be paid" means the insufficient amount resulted from subtraction of the
following sum from the amount as specified under percent to deposit in
installments of the estimated amount in this sub-section:
(1) The amount of tax deposited in that income year by a prior installment
before the date on which the installment in question is to be paid,
(2)The amount of tax withheld from the payments to be included in computing
the income of any person in any income year pursuant to Chapter I 7 before the
date on which the installment in question is to be paid in that year,
(3)If the agent withholding tax or the person subject to tax withholding pays to
the Department the amount of tax deemed to be withheld from the payment
referred to in clause (2) pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 90 in that
yearbefore the date on which the installment is to be paid, such amount of tax,
(4)The amount of tax adjustment for medical treatment expenses which that
person may claim pursuant to Section 51 in respect of the accepted medical
treatment expenses incurred by that person before the date on which the
installment is to be paid.
(la)217The person paying tax on the basis of transaction shall pay tax in two
installments as follows:
215Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
216Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
217Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Date on which payment is to be
Amount of tax to be paid
By the end of Poush(mid-January)
Tax at the prescribed rate on the transaction
up to 20 poush (4 January)
By the end of Ashad(mid-July)
Tax amount to be set by subtracting the tax
paid within the last day of Poush (mid January) from the amount of tax calculated
as per the prescribed rate upon estimating
the transaction that would be carried on by
the end of Ashad (mid-July) on the basis of
real transaction up to 20 Ashad (4 July).
(2)218 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the amount of
installments to be paid pursuant to that sub-section is less 219than seven thousand five
hundred rupees, amount of such installment need not to be paid.
(3) The person paying installment shall be allowed to deduct the amount of tax
paid by way of installment in any year pursuant to this Section for the tax chargeable
in that year.
95. Return of estimated tax to be paid: (1) Each person who has to pay installment in any
income year has to submit to the Department a return, in such format and manner as may
be prescribed by 220the Department, setting out the estimates of the following amounts of
that person for that year within the date on which the first installment of tax is to be paid
in that year pursuant to Section 94:
(a) Assessable income that could be earned by that person from each source of
employment, business and investment in that year and source of such income,
(b) Taxable income of that person that could be earned in that year and the
amount of tax to be paid by the person referred to in clause (a) of Section 3,
which is computed pursuant to Section 4 without subtracting the amount of tax
adjustment for medical treatment expenses,
(c) In respect of a non-resident person's foreign permanent establishment
situated in Nepal, the amount of income sent abroad by such foreign
establishment in that year and the amount of tax to be paid by the person
referred to in clause (b) of Section 3, which has been computed in that income
pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 4, and
(d) Any other details specified by the Department.
218Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
219Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
220Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) The sum total of the amount of tax mentioned in clauses (b) and ( c) of
sub-section ( 1) shall be the estimated tax payable by the person referred to in subsection (1) in that income year.
(3) In computing the foreign tax adjustment amount to be claimed pursuant to

Section 71 in order to make an estimation of the tax to be paid in any income year
pursuant to clause (b) of subsection (1), only the foreign tax paid by any person in that
year or the foreign income tax estimated by him as payable in that year has to be
computed.
(4) Unless and until any person paying installment of tax submits to the
department the amended estimate setting out the necessary information and the
reasons for amendment in the format referred to in sub-section (1), the estimate made
by him pursuant to that sub-section shall remain valid throughout the income year.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (2), the amended
estimate submitted by any person pursuant to subsection (4) shall be applicable only
in computing the installment of tax to be paid pursuant to Section 94 in that income
year after the date of its submission to the Department.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (5), the
Department may so specify that any person or class who has to pay installment of tax
is not required to submit an estimate pursuant to sub-section (1).
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if any person who
has to pay installment of tax does not submit an estimate in any income year pursuant
to sub-section (1) or where the Department is not satisfied with the submitted estimate
or amended estimate221…..the Department may do as follows:
(a) The person referred to in clause (a) or (b) of Section 3 may make an estimate
of the estimated tax to be paid by him in that year on the basis of the tax
required to be paid by him in the last income year, and
(b) If the Department is not satisfied with the estimate prepared pursuant to
clause (a), the method used to prepare the estimate and the estimate submitted
by the person, the Department shall give a notice in writing setting out the
reasons therefor to the person who has to pay installment.
(8) If the Department gives a notice to the person who has to pay installment
pursuant to sub-section (7), the amount of estimated tax to be paid by that person in
that year shall be the amount estimated by the Department.
95A.222 To collect advance tax: (1) The entity operating commodity future market service
shall collect advance tax at the rate of ten percent on the profit and benefit acquired by
the person doing under commodity future market from such business.
(2) If any person other than a resident entity doing transaction on sale and
purchase of securities being registered under the prevailing law derives benefits from
221Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
222Inserted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
the disposal of interest in any resident entity, advance tax shall be collected on such
benefit computed pursuant to Section 37, as follows:
(a) In the case of benefit acquired from the disposal of interest of an entity
enlisted in the Securities Board of Nepal, at the rate of five percent223 of the
profit for a resident individual, ten percent of the profit for a resident entity and
twenty-five percent of the profit for others, by the entity working for securities
exchange market,
(b) In the case of benefit acquired from the disposal of interest of an entity not
listed in the Securities Board of Nepal, at the rate of ten percent of the profit for
a resident individual, fifteen percent of the profit for a resident entity and
twenty-five percent of the profit for others, by the entity whose interest has been
disposed.
(2a)224 In computing benefit pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (2), it shall
be computed on the basis of weightage average cost of the interest owned by that
person in the entity of which interest is to be disposed on that date.
(3) While recording the share by the Company Registrar's Office upon
disposal of interest pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (2), it shall record only after
the submission of evidence of payment of advance tax in profit amount.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no advance tax
shall be collected in the case of disposal of interest invested through a mutual fund.
(5) The Land-Revenue Office shall collect advance tax as follows at the time
of registration on capital gain from the disposal of land or private building of any
individual:
(a) Whereas the disposed non-business taxable asset (land and building) has
the ownership of five years or more than that, at the rate of two and half
percent,
(b) Whereas the disposed non-business taxable asset (land and building) has
the ownership of less than five years, at the rate of five percent.
(6)225 If, except as mentioned in sub-section (5), a land or building owned by
any other person is disposed, the Land-Revenue Office shall withhold tax at the rate
of one and half percent of the price of disposal at the time of registration.
(6a)226 Resident Bank or financial institution shall collect tax at the rate of 15
percent on the exchange amount from students who take facility of foreign exchange
for language test and standardized examination for study abroad.
(7) Tax shall be withheld at the customs point at the rate of five percent for
any such ox, buffalo, goat, sheep, mountain goat under Chapter 1 of the Custom
223Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
224Inserted by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
225Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
226Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
(Unofficial Translation)
Classification, live, fresh and frozen fish under Chapter 3, such fresh flowers under

Chapter 6, such fresh vegetables, potato, onion,227dry vegetables, garlic, baby corn
under Chapter 7 and such fresh fruits under Chapter 8 228 and two and half percent
for such meat under Chapter 2, such milk products, eggs, honey under Chapter 4, such
barley, millet, sorghum (Junelo), rice, beaten rice under Chapter 10, such refined
wheat flour, wheat flour under Chapter 11, such herbal medicines, sugarcane under

Chapter 12 and such vegetation products under Chapter 14 as are imported for
business purpose.
(8) Even though the person or entity responsible for collection of advance tax
pursuant to sub-sections (1), (2), (5) and (6) does not collect it, the tax shall be
deemed to have been collected at the time required for such collection.
(9) The person paying the advance tax shall submit the details in the mode and
format as prescribed by the Department within twenty-five days of expiration of each
month.
(10) The amount collected as advance tax or amount considered as collected
under 229sub-section (8) shall be paid to the Department within the time limit as
mentioned in the same Section along with the details mentioned in 230sub-section (9).
(11) The person responsible to deposit advance tax and the person responsible
to collect tax shall be, jointly and individually, responsible for depositing such amount
in the Department in the following circumstances:
(a) Whereas the person required to collect advance tax does not collect the tax,
(b) Whereas the person required to collect advance tax does not deposit
amount collected under 231sub-section (8) in the Department pursuant to
232sub-section (10).
(12) The person required to deposit advance tax under 233sub-section (11) shall
deposit such tax within twenty-five days of expiration of the date mentioned in 234subsection (9).
(13) Whereas the person required to deposit advance tax deposited advance
tax in the Department pursuant to 235sub-section (10) without collecting the advance
tax, the amount equal to such deposited tax, he or she shall collect recover such
amount from the person required to deposit such tax.
227Inserted by the Financial Act, 2077(2020).
228Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
229Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
230Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
231Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
232Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
233Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
234Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
235Amended by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
(14) The person required to deposit tax shall be allowed to deduct the advance
tax deposited pursuant to this Section from annual tax liability.

Chapter-19
Income Return and Assessment of Tax
96. Income return: (1) Each person shall, within three months of expiration of an income
year, and subject to Sections 97, 98 and 100, submit an income return of that year in the
place as specified by the Department.
(2) The income return referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as follows:
(a) It has to be prepared in the manner and format as specified by the
Department, setting out the following matters:
(1) Assessable income earned by that person from each
employment, business or investment in that year and source of
such income,
(2) Taxable income of that person in that year and the tax to be
imposed on the person referred to in clause (a) of Section 3 in
respect of that income,
(3) Income sent abroad in that income year by a non-resident
person's foreign permanent establishment situated in Nepal, and
the tax imposable in that income,
(4) 236...............
(5) 237...............
(6) Such other information and details as specified by the
Department.
(b) The income return has to be signed by that person or manager, covenanting
that it is true and complete, and
(c) The income return has to be accompanied by the following matters:
(1) 238...............
(2) Any details made available to that person pursuant to subsection ( 4 ),
(3) Evidence of choice, if any, made pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 4, and
236Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
237Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
238Deleted by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(4) Such other information and details as specified by the
Department.
(3) If any person, except m capacity of an employee, prepares or assists in
preparing the income return of any other person or the documents or details to be
accompanied with the income return in lieu of any payment, such a person has to
certify the following matters:
(a) Having examined the documents maintained by other person
pursuant to Section 81, and
(b) Having the circumstances in question been actually reflected
from the details or information.
(4) If the person required to certify the return pursuant to sub-section (3)
refuses to certify, information, setting out the reasons for such refusal, has to be given
to the person whose income return is to be certified.
(5) The Department may, in the following circumstances, require any person
to submit the income return of an income year or any part of the income year within
the time-limit mentioned in the written notice given by it to such person subject to

Section 100 prior to the due time-limit for submission of the income return of the
income year pursuant to sub-section (1):
(a) If that person becomes bankrupt, insolvent or is dissolved,
(b) If that person is to leave Nepal for an uncertain period of time,
(c) If that person is leaving the act being carried out by him in
Nepal, or
(d) If the Department otherwise thinks it proper.
(6)239 If any person wishes to amend his or her income return submitted to the
Department within the time-limit being it otherwise, that person may amend the
income return within thirty days of the date of its submission in ccordance with the
process specified by the Department.
97 .240 Submission of income return not required: (1) Except where the Department issues a
written order or gives an order by a public, any of the following persons shall not be
required to submit the income return of any income year pursuant to Section 96:
(a) Out of the persons mentioned in clause (a) of Section 3, any
person who is not required to pay tax in that income year,
(b) Any person mentioned in clause ( c) of Section 3 in that income
year,
239Inserted by the Financial Act,2076(2019).
240Amended by the Financial Act,2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) Any resident individual to which sub-section (3) of Section 4
applies in that income year,
(d) If the owner of a motor vehicle depositing tax pursuant to subsection (13) of Section 1 of Schedule I is an individual except
a sole proprietorship firm, such an individual,
(e) An individual not willing to submit income return having
income only from the disposal of nonbusiness taxable property.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), an individual
having income of more than four million rupees in any income year shall submit the
income return pursuant to Section 96.
(3) The individual required to submit the return pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall include in it the income gained from business exemption benefit referred to in
clause (d) of Section 5, sub-section (3) of Section 7, clause (a) of sub-section (3) of

Section 8, clause (a) of sub-section (3) of Section 9 and Section 11, in addition to the
income required to be included.
Provided that it shall not be mandatory to include a meeting allowance and
interest in income.
(4) The income referred to in clause (c) of Section 3 and income from tax
exemption under Section 11 of the Act shall be deducted from the income set pursuant
to sub-section (3).
Provided that it need not be deducted where a meeting allowance and interest
income have not been included.
(5) The format of the income returns to be submitted pursuant to sub-section
(2) shall be as specified by the Inland Revenue Department.
98 . Extension of time-limit for submission of income return: (1) If any person who has to
submit an income return pursuant to Section 96 makes an application in writing, within
the time limit for the submission of such return, to the Department for the extension of
the time-limit, the Department may extend the time-limit for submission of the income
return if the reason is reasonable. Information of the decision made by the Department
on the application so made for the extension of time-limit has to be given in writing to
the applicant.
(2) The Department may extend, at one time or several times, the time-limit for a
period not exceeding three months to submit the income return pursuant to sub-section
99. Assessment of tax: (1) If any person has submitted the income return of any income year,
setting out the following amounts, on the date of submission of the return, the tax of the
income return shall be deemed as if it were assessed:
(a) The amount of tax mentioned in the income return and payable
by the person mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 3 in
that income year, and
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) The amount of tax mentioned in the income rerun and due and
payable in that year.
(2) If any person does not submit the income return of any income year, tax
shall be deemed to have been assessed as follows on the due date for submission of
the tax return until the tax return is submitted:
(a) The amount of tax payable by that person in that year shall be
equal to the sum of the amount of tax deducted from the
amount received pursuant to Chpter-17 and the amount paid in
installment for that year pursuant to Chapter-18, and
(b) Tax shall not be deemed due and payable as per tax assessment.
100. Self-assessment of tax: (1) Section 99 shall be applicable If the income return of any
income year or any part of any income year has to be submitted pursuant to sub-section
(5) of Section 96.
(2)241 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (l), in the circumstance
mentioned in sub-section (5) of Section 96, the Department may, based on the amounts
mentioned in sub-clauses (1), (2) and (3) of clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 96,
assess the tax of that person for any income year or for the part of such year in a
justifiable manner.
(3) The following provision shall be applicable if tax is assessed pursuant to
sub-section (1) or (2):
(a) A person whose tax is assessed for the whole income year is not
required to submit the income return referred to in sub-section (1) of

Section 96 for that income year,
(b) A person whose tax is assessed for a portion of any income year is
required to submit the income return referred to in sub-section (1) of

Section 96 for that income year.
(4) The amount of tax paid as per the assessment of tax for a portion of any
income year may be adjusted to the tax chargeable as per the assessment of tax for the
whole year.
In assessing the tax pursuant to this Section, the Department has to
give a time-limit of seven days for the submission of proof and evidence for defense.
101. Amended tax assessment: (1) The Department may have amended tax assessment in
order to adjust the tax liability of a person whose tax has been assessed pursuant to

Section 99 or 100 on reasonable grounds.
(2) If the Department thinks it proper to re-amend the amended tax assessment
made pursuant to sub-section (1), it may amend it for times, irrespective of how many,
on reasonable grounds.
241Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(3) The Department shall, in assessing the tax pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
complete assessment within four months from the following date:
(a) If tax is assessed pursuant to Section 99, the due date for the
submission of income return,
(b) If tax is assessed pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 100, the date on
which the tax assessment notice is given to the person whose tax is
assessed,
(c) If tax is assessed pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the date mentioned
in clause (a) or (b) related with the previous tax assessment that has
been amended pursuant to sub-section (1).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if the tax of any
person has been assessed in a wrong manner due to fraud, the Department may amend
such tax assessment at any time. Such amendment has to be made no later than one
year of receipt of information that details have been given or tax assessed
fraudulently.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if the tax
assessment is amended or the assessed tax is lessened by the Revenue Tribunal or
other competent courts, the Department shall not be able to amend such tax
assessment to that extent.
Provided that if an order has been issued to reexamine it, it shall not be
deemed to bar the making of amendment.
(6) In making amendment to tax assessment pursuant to this Section, the
Department has to give that person a notice in writing clearly setting out the grounds
for such amendment and a time limit of 242fifteen days for the submission of proof and
evidence for defense on such assessment of tax.
102. Tax assessment notice: The Department shall give the person, whose tax is assessed, a
written notice of tax assessment made pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 100 or

Section 101 setting out the following matters:
(a) The assessed tax to be paid and due and payable by the person
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 3 for the income year or
period related with assessment of tax,
(b) The method of computation of tax in the tax assessment as mentioned
in clause (a),
(c) The reason why the Department has to assess the tax,
(d) The time for payment of the assessed tax due and payable, and
(e) The time, place and mode for making a petition if one is not satisfied
with the assessment of tax.
242Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-20
Collection, Remission and Refund of Tax
103. Security for tax payable by withholding: (1) The tax required to be. by a person who has
to withhold tax pursuant to Chapter-17 has to be given preference to any payment to be
made by the order of a court or as per any other law or in any other manner.
(2) The following provisions shall apply in respect of the tax withheld by a
person who has to withhold tax pursuant to Chapter-1 7:
(a) The tax withheld by such a person as well as the property, if any,
received for such tax shall be deemed to have been withheld for the
Government of Nepal,
(b) The amount of tax so withheld cannot be attached to the loan or
liability of such a person, and
(c) If the person withholding such tax becomes bankrupt or is dissolved,
the amount of tax so withheld shall not be treated as a part of the assets
so become bankrupt or dissolved; and in making division upon such
dissolution or bankruptcy, the Department shall have the first lien over
the tax withheld or over the property.
104. Lien over property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the laws in force, if any
person does pay tax on the due date for payment of tax, the lien of the Government of
Nepal shall be deemed to have been created over the property of the person who is in
arrear of tax.
(2) When claiming the property over which the lien is created pursuant to subsection (1), the Department shall give that person a written notice setting out the
following matters:
(a) Description of the property claimed,
(b) Limit of the claim referred to in sub-section (3),
(c) Tax related to the claim, and
(d) Other matters, if any.
(3) When making a claim in the property pursuant to subsection (2), the claim
shall be created only to the extent of the tax due and payable by such a person, interest
and claim to be paid in respect of such tax pursuant to Section 119 and the expenses
incurred in auction sale.
(4) The claim made pursuant to sub-section (2) shall not lie unless and until
the following matter takes place:
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) Until the Department gives information to have the claim registered
pursuant to sub-section (6) in respect of the building and land,
(b) Until the Department possesses such property pursuant to sub-section
(3) of Section 105 in respect of other direct/tangible property, and
(c) Until the notice referred to in sub-section (2) is given to the person who
is in arrear of tax, in any other circumstances whatsoever.
(5) If the person who is in arrear of tax pays to the all the amounts referred to
in sub-section (3) and covered by theclaim made pursuant to sub-section (2), which
are due and payable by such a person.
(6) If the Department makes a claim over any land or building pursuant to subsection (2), information has to be given to the concerned Land Revenue Office; and
that Office has to so withhold such land or property that it cannot be sold and
disposed of to or ownership to it cannot be transferred to any person.
(7) If the claim over the land and building has to be released pursuant to subsection (5), the Department has to give information thereof to the Land Revenue
Office. Upon receipt of such information, the Land Revenue Office has to release the
land and building so withheld.
(8) The Department has to promptly give the person in arrear of tax a notice
setting out the following matters, in respect of the expenses to be incurred pursuant to
sub-section (3):
(a) The expenses incurred by the Department for the claim on the property
of the person in arrear of tax and for the auction sale thereof, prior to
giving such a notice, and
(b) The date on which the person in arrear of tax has to pay such expenses
to the Department.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "expenses incurred for claim
and auction sale" means the following expenses incurred or to be incurred
by the Department:
(a) The expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Department in creating
or releasing the claim over the property, or
(b) The expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Department pursuant to

Section 105 in possessing, holding and auctioning the claimed
property.
105. Auction sale of claimed property: (1) The Department shall give the person in arrear of
tax a notice on auctioning the claimed property held by the person in arrear of tax.
(2) The notice given pursuant to sub-section (1) may be included in the notice
given pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 104 or attached with such a notice. Such a
notice has to clearly set out the following matters and be given to the person in arrear of
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) The property claimed and the mode and time of auction or sale of the
property, and
(b) In respect of a tangible property, the mode and place of possessing the
property by the Department.
(3) After the Department has given the notice referred to in sub-section (1) or
(2) to the person in arrear of tax, it may do as follows:
(a) To have possession of the tangible property mentioned in the notice at
any time
(b) To enter into any premises mentioned in the notice referred to in subsection (1) for the purpose of having possession of the tangible
property at any time,
(c) In respect of the tangible property except the land or building, to keep
such properties in such place as thought proper by the Department at
the expense of the person in arrear of tax.
(4) If the Department has given the notice referred to in sub-section (1) to the
person in arrear of tax, it may, in the following time, publicly auction such claimed
property or sell and dispose of or use such property in such manner as thought proper:
(a) If the claimed property is the land or building, after thirty days of the
date of possession of such property pursuant to sub-section (3),
(b) If the claimed property is a perishable tangible property, after one day
of the date of possession pursuant to subsection (3),
(c) If the claimed property is a tangible property except those properties
mentioned in clause (a) or (b), after ten days of possession pursuant to
sub-section (3), and
(d) If the claimed property is any other kind of property, after ten days of
possession of such property pursuant to sub-section (3).
(5) The expenses incurred in having claim and auctioning the property
auctioned shall first be deducted from the proceeds derived from the auction sale
pursuant to sub-section (4). After the expenses are so deducted, the payable tax and
the interest payable on the tax pursuant to Section 119 shall be deducted; and then, if
any amount remains balance, such amount shall be refunded to the person in arrear of
(6) After the proceeds derived from the auction sale have been adjusted
pursuant to sub-section (5), the Department has to give a written notice setting out the
process of the adjustment to the person in arrear of tax.
(7) If, in adjusting the proceeds derived from the auction sale by following the
process referred to in sub-section (5), the proceeds are not sufficient to fully pay the
amounts for the expenses mentioned in that sub-section, tax and interest, the
(Unofficial Translation)
Department has to re-institute the action to recover the shortfall amount pursuant to
Section l 04, 111 or this Section.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section,
(a) "Claimed property" means the property of the person Withholding tax, who is in
arrears of tax, mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 103 or sub-section (2) of

Section 04.
(b) "Expenses incurred in making claim and auction sale" means the expenses
incurred in making claim and auction sale pursuant to Section 104.
(c) "Person in arrear of tax" includes the person withholding tax mentioned in
Sections 103 and 104.
106. To prevent departing from243...... Nepal: (1) If any person does not pay the tax within the
time-limit due for the payment of tax, 244the Department may, by giving a written notice
to the concerned office of the Government of Nepal, issue an order to prevent such
person from leaving the country for a period not exceeding 72 hours from the date of
expiration of the time of issue of the notice to such person to pay tax.
(2) If it is required to may any extension m the period mentioned in sub-section
(1), the Department shall obtain prior leave of the concerned High Court.
(3) If the person referred to in sub-section (1) pays tax or the Department thinks
that such person has made satisfactory arrangement on payment of tax, it may withdraw
such order by giving a notice to the concerned office pursuant to sub-section (1).
107. Officer employees of entity to be held responsible: (1) If any entity does not observe
anything required to be observed under this Act, each personwho acts as the officer of
that entity at that time shall be responsible for that.
(2) If any entity does not pay tax on the date due for payment of tax, all officers
who are incumbent in that entity for the time being or incumbent until before six months
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay that tax.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), these subsections shall not be applicable in the following circumstances:
(a) Where the entity has committed such offense without knowledge and
consent of such person, and
(b) Where that person has, in order to avoid such offense, observed or
exercised care, effort and skill which a reasonable man would observe
or exercise in similar circumstances.
(4) If any person pays the tax required to be paid pursuant to sub-section (2),
that person may do as follows:
243Deleted by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066(2010).
244Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) To recover the amount which he has so paid from that entity,
(b) For purposes of clause (a), to so hold under own control the property
including the moneys of that entity which is under his possession or
which may come under his possession that it is not in excess of the
amount so paid.
(5) If any person holds any property under his control pursuant to clause (b) of
sub-section (4), the entity or any other person shall not be entitled to make any claim
against such person.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, "officer of any entity" means the
manager of that entity or any person who acts in that capacity.
108. Recovery of tax from recipient: (1) Each recipient shall give a notice of the matter to the
Department no later than fifteen days of the date of appointment to the post of recipient
or the date of having possession of the property situated in Nepal, whichever is earlier.
(2) The Department shall give a written notice to the person in arrear of tax on
the amount to be paid.
(3) On receipt of the notice referred to in sub-section (1), the recipient shall do as
follows:
(a) To set aside the amount notified by the Department under sub-section
(2) after making payment of the loan, if any, which is preferential to
the tax payable pursuant to sub-section (2), subject to clause (c) of subsection (2) of Section 103, from the proceeds of the sale of the required
portion of the property which have come under possession of the
recipient, and
(b) To pay to the Department the amount so set aside for his tax liability
on behalf of the person in arrear of tax.
(4) It shall be the personal liability of the recipient to pay to the Department the
amount equal to the tax liability payable by such person in arrear of tax to the extent
that no amount has been set aside by the recipient pursuant to sub-section (3).
Provided that the recipient may recover from the person in arrear of tax the
amount of tax paid.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(a) "Recipient" means any of the following persons:
(1) A liquidator,
(2) A person appointed from outside or by a court as a recipient in
respect of any property or entity,
(3) A person possessing a property by mortgage,
(Unofficial Translation)
(4) Heir apparent, administrator or manager of the property belonging
to a deceased individual, or
(5) A person looking after the affairs of an incapacitated individual.
(b) "Person in arrear of tax" means the person whose property has come under
possession of the recipient.
109. Recovery of tax from the person liable to pay tax: (1) If the person in arrear of tax does
not pay tax within the due date for payment of tax, the Department may, by giving a
notice in writing, order any of the following payers to pay to it the amount to the extent
of the amount of tax payable on behalfof the person in arrear of tax, within the date
mentioned in that notice:
(a) The person who has to pay amount to the person in arrear of tax,
(b) The person who holds money for or on behalf of the person in arrear of
(c) The person who holds money on behalf of any third person in a manner
to pay it to the person in arrear of tax, or
(d) The person who has got authority from the third party to pay the
amount to the person in arrear of tax.
(2) The Department has to give a copy of the notice given to the payer
pursuant to sub-section (1) to the person in arrear of tax.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the date mentioned
in the notice referred to in that sub-section shall not be earlier than the date mentioned
in clauses (a) and (b ):
(a) The date on which the amount has to be paid to the person in arrear of
tax or the date on which such amount has been held on his behalf, and
(b) The date on which the notice has been given pursuant to sub-section
(4) The amount paid by the payer pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be deemed
as paid to the person in arrear of tax. The person in arrear of tax or any other person
shall not be allowed to claim such amount against the payer.
110. Recovery of tax from the agent of non-resident person: (1) If a non-resident person in
arrear of tax does not pay tax within the due date for payment of tax, the Department
may, by giving a notice in writing, order any person who is in possession of any
property owned by the person who is in arrear of tax to pay tax from the amount
equivalent to the market value of that property, on behalf of the person in arrear of tax,
in respect of the tax liability of the third person, in the sum not exceeding the amount of
tax payable by such person in arrear of tax, within the date mentioned in the notice.
(2) If any person pays the amount of tax as per the order referred to in subsection (1), he may do as follows:
(Unofficial Translation)
(a) To recover the amount of such payment from the person in arrear of
(b) For purposes of clause (a), to take under his control any property
whatsoever, including the money belonging to the person in arrear of
tax, which is or would come in his possession, in such a manner that it
is not in excess of the amount so paid.
(3) If any person takes possession of any property pursuant clause (b) of subsection (2), the person in arrear of tax or any other person shall not be allowed to
make any claim against such a person.
110A. 245Recovery of arrear tax in installment: If, prior to the institution of the case pursuant
to Section 111, any person makes a written request to pay the arrear amount in
installment, the tax officer may give approval to pay in installment, giving a reasonable
time-limit.
110B. 246 Responsibility of tax payment of joint venture: The persons involved in a joint
venture shall be jointly or individually responsible for payment of tax obligation of the
joint venture in which they are involved.
110C.247 Person receiving real consideration to be responsible for payment of tax: If it is
proved that the person receiving real consideration of a business is different than the
person registered for business, the person receiving such consideration shall be
responsible for payment of tax of such business.
111. Institution of case on failure to pay tax: The Department may file a case in the concerned
District Court for the recovery of tax from the person who does not pay tax on the due
time-limit for payment of tax.
112. Remission: (1) If the tax payable by any person cannot be recovered, the Government of
Nepal may remit such tax in full or in part.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Government of
Nepal may remit, in full or in part, the fee or interest imposed pursuant to Chapter-22.
113.Tax refund and adjustment of amount: ( 1) If any person has paid tax exceeding the tax
liability payable by him, the Department may give direction to subtract the excess
amount of tax paid by him from the amount of tax payable by him pursuant to this Act.
The Department has to refund the excess amount to be set by such subtraction to the
concerned person.
(2) If the tax in question is not to be paid along with the interest paid by any
person pursuant to Section 119, the Department has to refund such interest to that
person.
245Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
246Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
247Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(3)248 If any person makes an application to the Department, as prescribed, for
the refund of the amount pursuant to sub-section (1), the Department shall refund such
amount within sixty days of the date on which the application was made.
(4) The person who makes an application pursuant to subsection (3) has to make
such application within two years from the latest date out of the following dates. If an
application is not made within that time-limit, the amount referred to in sub-section (1)
shall not be refunded:
(a) The date of expiration of the income year existed by virtue of payment
of the excess amount,
(b) The date on which the excess amount is paid, or
(c) The date on which is the case is decided.
(5) The Department shall give a notice in writing of the decision made by it on
the application made pursuant to sub-section (3).
(6) When refunding any amount of tax by the Department to any person by
virtue of the order of a court or any other reason, the Department has to pay to such a
person the interest as per the normal rate for the following period:
(a) If such tax refund is related to the excess tax adjustment available to
any person in any income year pursuant to Section 93, 94 or l 00, the
period between the due date for submission of the tax return pursuant
to Section 96 and the date of tax refund, and
(b) In any other case, the period between the date of payment by such
person of the refundable tax and the date of tax refund.
(7) Tax deduction that can be claimed pursuant to Section 51 or 71 shall not
be adjusted in any year, and such tax deduction shall not be adjusted in amounts or
refunded pursuant to this sub-section.
Provided that in that year the tax deduction adjustment may be made in
accordance with the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of Section 4, sub-section
(4) of Section 51 and sub-section (3) of Section 71.

Chapter-21
Review and Appeal
114. Decisions subject to administrative review, and procedures therefor: (l) For the purposes
of this Act, the following decisions may be subject to administrative review:
(a) Advance ruling issued by the Department pursuant to Section 76,
(al)249 Decision or order made pursuant to sub-section (8) of Section 90,
248Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
249Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) Estimate made by the Department on, or decision made by it to
estimate, the estimated tax payable by any person, pursuant to subsection (7) of Section 95,
(c) Decision made by the Department to order any person to submit the
income return pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 96 or Section 97,
(d) Decision made by the Department on any application made by any
person for the extension of the time-limit for submission of the income
return pursuant to Section 98,
( e) Assessment of tax payable by any person for any income year
pursuant to Section 100 or 101 or assessment of auction expenses
refen-ed to in sub-section (5) of Section 105250 or assessment of the
fees and interest payable by any person pursuant to Section 122,
(f) Notice given by the Department requiring to set aside the amounts as
receivable by any person as a recipient, pursuant to sub-section (2) of

Section 108,
(g) Decision made by the Department to order any person who holds
moneys payable to the person in an-ear of tax to pay the same to the
Department pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 109,
(h) Decision made by the Department to order any person to pay tax of any
person due and payable on behalf of a nonresident person pursuant to
sub-section (1) of Section 110,
(i) Decision made by the Department on any application made by any
person for the refund of tax pursuant to subsection (5) of Section 113,
(j) Decision made by the Department on any application made by any
person for the extension of the time-limit for filing a complaint
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 115.
(2) In spite of any decision made by the Department on the matters mentioned
in clauses (d), (i) and U) of sub-section (1 ), if the Department does not give a notice
of the decision to the applicant within thirty days after the making of the application
pursuant to Section 98, sub-section (3) of Section 113 or sub-section (3) of Section
115, the decision may be subject to administrative review as if it were a decision to
reject the application.
(3) If the applicant does receive a notice of decision within the time-limit
referred to in sub-section (2) and registers information thereof with the Department,
the decision made by the Department to reject the application mentioned in that subsection and notice thereof shall be deemed to have been served on that person on that
date.
250Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
115. Application for administrative review: (1) A person who is not satisfied with any
decision subject to administrative review referred to in Section 114 may make an
application to the Department against the decision within thirty days of the date of
receipt of notice of that decision.
(2) The application to be made pursuant to sub-section (1) has to clearly set out
the reasons and grounds for such review.
(3) If the time-limit for making application pursuant to subsection (1) expires and
any person makes an application for the extension of time-limit within seven days from
the date of expiration of the time-limit, the Department may do as follows:
(a) To extend the time-limit for a period not exceeding thirty days from the
date of expiration of the time-limit for making application pursuant to
sub-section (1), where there is a reasonable reason, and
(b) To give the applicant a written notice of the decision made by the
Department on the application.
(4) The implementation of the decision mentioned in subsection (1) of Section
114 shall not be deemed to be affected from the making of application pursuant to
sub-section (1).
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the Department
may postpone or otherwise affect the decision made pursuant to sub-section (1) of

Section 114 pending the settlement of the application made by any person pursuant to
sub-section (1).
(6)251 A person who make an application pursuant to subsection (1) shall pay
the total amount of undisputed tax and 252one fourth of the disputed tax, out of the
assessed tax amount.
(7) The Department may do as follows on an application made by any person
pursuant to sub-section (1):
(a) To accept or reject, fully or partly, the matters mentioned in the
application, and
(b) To give a written notice of the decision on the application.
(8)253 If the Department fails to give the applicant a notice of decision on the
application within sixty days of the date on which the application was made pursuant
to sub-section (1), the applicant may make an appeal to the Revenue Tribunal
pursuant to Section 116.
251Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
252Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
253Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
(9)254 If an appeal is made pursuant to sub-section (8), such person shall give
information in writing to the Department, enclosing the copy of appeal, within fifteen
days of the date on which appeal was filed.
116. Appeal to the Revenue Tribunal: (1) A person who is not satisfied with any decision
made to the Department pursuant to Section 115 may make an appeal to the Revenue
Tribunal under the Revenue Tribunal Act, 2031(1974).
(2) A person who makes an appeal pursuant to sub-section (1) has to register a
copy of the appeal with the Department within fifteen days of the date of making
appeal.
(3) The implementation of the decision mentioned in subsection (1) of Section
114 shall not be deemed to be affected from the making of an appeal pursuant to subsection (1).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 114, if the
Director General has made a decision subject to administrative review as mentioned in
that sub-section, an appeal may be made to the Revenue Tribunal.

Chapter-22
Fees and Interest
117. Fees to be charged in event of failure to maintain documents or to submit return or
income return: 255(1) If any person does not submit the following details, the following
charge shall be imposed on him:
(a) If the income return of any income year has not been submitted
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 95, 256 five thousand rupees or
0.01 percent of the assessable amount of income mentioned in the
income return, whichever is higher,
(b) If any person required to collect advance tax has not submitted the
details pursuant to 257 sub-section (9) of Section 95A, such person shall
be imposed one and half percent annually of the amount of advance tax
to be collected from the date required to make submission till the date
of actual submission for each month and the portion of the month,
(c) If the income return of any income year is not submitted pursuant to
sub-section (l) of Section 96, for the person mentioned in sub-section
(4) of Section 4, amount at the rate of one hundred rupees per month
and for the other persons, at the rate of 0.1 percent per year of the
assessable income drawn out without deducting any amount, if any,
that can be deducted and by including any amount, if any, that has to
be included in computing the income of any income year or hundred
rupees per month, whichever is higher.
254Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
255Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
256Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
257 Amended by the Financial Act, 2077 (2020).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) If any person does not maintain the documents required to be maintained
in any income year pursuant to Section 81, a fee in a sum to be set by 0.1 percent per
year of the assessable income drawn out without deducting any amount, if any, that
can be deducted and by including any amount, if any, that has to be included in
computing the income of any income year for each month and portion of the month or
a sum set by one thousand rupees per month, whichever is higher, shall be imposed on
such a person.
(3) If any person withholding tax does not submit the return referred to in subsection (1) of Section 90, a fee in a sum to be set by two and a half percent per year of
the amount of tax to be withheld for each month and portion of the month from the
due date for submission of the return until the date on which such return is submitted
shall be imposed on such a person.
118. 258Interest to be charged where person making payment in installments makes lesser
payment of estimated tax: (1) If, with respect to the amount of installment tax to be paid
by any person in any income year under Section 94, the amount paid pursuant to clause
(b) becomes higher than that of clause (a), interest shall be charged on such more
amount pursuant to sub-section (2):
(a) Amount of each installment paid by such person in any income year,
(b) Estimated amount or amount of revised estimate, if correct, and, if not
correct, ninety percent tax amount of each installment period in such
income year to be submitted by the person mentioned in clauses (a)
and (b) of Section 3.
(2) There shall be imposed on the person referred to in subsection (l) an
interest at the general interest rate of each month and portion of the month for the
following period from the date for submission of the installment of that year:
(a) In the case of a person required to assess tax pursuant to sub-section
(1) of Section 99, till the date for submission of income return
(b) In the case of a person for whom the revised tax has been assessed by
the Department for the first time under Section 101 as not being tax
assessed pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 99,till the date of
submission of notice of such amended tax assessment under Section
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "amount to be submitted on
installment" means the installment amount computed on the basis of the provision of
sub-section (5) of Section 95 for not submitting revised estimate once the estimate has
been submitted pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 94 and for those not submitting
estimate that the Department estimates pursuant to sub-section (7) of Section 95 and
for those submitting revised estimate and where the Department estimates being not
satisfied with the estimate or revised estimate submitted pursuant to sub-section (7) of

Section 95.
258Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
119. Interest to be charged if tax is not paid: (1) If any person does not pay tax on the
prescribed due date for payment of tax, an interest by the normal rate of interest, for each
month and portion of the month, in the amount due and payable shall be imposed on the
person for the period during which tax is so due and payable.
(2) For the purpose of computing the interest to be paid pursuant to sub-section
(1), interest shall not be exempted in the extended time-limit given pursuant to Section
(3) 259 The person responsible for withholding tax shall not be al1owed to recover
the interest payable by him, because of his failure to observe sub-section (8) of Section
95A, or the person withholding tax shall not be allowed to recover the interest payable
by him, because of his failure to observe sub-section ( 4) of Section 90, from the person
required to make tax withholding or the person subject to tax withholding.
(4) 260 If the tax is not paid within the time-limit given pursuant to Section 11
OA., it shall be recovered from such person along with an additional interest of five
percent per annum on the outstanding tax.
119A. 261 Charge to be imposed: Except as otherwise provided in this Act, there shall be
imposed a charge of five thousand to twenty-five thousand rupees on a person who does
not comply with any provision of this Act or the Rules framed under this Act.
120. Charge to be imposed on the person who submits false or misleading statement: If any
person submits to the Department a false or misleading statement on any matter or the
information mentioned in the statement becomes misleading as a result of concealing
information of any matter or thing required to be submitted or removing such
information from the statement, the following charge shall be imposed on such a person:
(a) If it has become false or misleading not by knowingly or recklessly but
by mistake, fifty percent of the amount less resulted therefrom.
(b) If it has become false or misleading knowingly or recklessly, one
hundred percent of the amount less resulted therefrom.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "statement submitted to the
Department" means any statement submitted in writing to the Department
or to the officer authorized by the Department in the course of performing
the duty pursuant to this Act and includes the statement submitted as
follows:
(a) Application, notice, complaint, description, deposition, or other
document submitted, prepared, given or furnished pursuant to this Act,
(b) Document submitted to the Department or any officer of the
department except under this Act,
259Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
260Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
261Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(c) Reply to any question asked by the Department or any officer to any
person, or
(d) Information given by any person who has reasonable knowledge of the
matter to be informed to the Department or any officer through any
other person.
121. Charge to be imposed on accomplice: A charge of cent percent amount of the tax less
paid by an accomplice who knowingly or recklessly aids or abets or advises any offender
262referred to in this Act shall be imposed on such accomplice.
122. Assessment of fee and interest: (1) The Department shall assess the fee and interest
required to be paid by any person pursuant to this Chapter.
(2) In computing the liability for the fee and interest chargeable where any
particular act has not been performed or chargeable in respect of any statement pursuant
to this Chapter, it shall be computed separately in the case of each section of this
Chapter.
(3) The fee and interest chargeable pursuant to this Section shall be added to any
other tax, if any, payable pursuant to this Act; and mere payment of such fee and interest
shall not be deemed as the release of any person from the liability related to criminal
proceedings mentioned in Chapter-23.
(4) If the fee and interest have been assessed pursuant to this Section, the
Department shall give a written notice of the assessment, setting out the following
matters, to that person. Such notice may be attached to and sent along with the notice to
be issued pursuant to Section 102:
(a) The reasons why the Department has to assess the fee and interest,
(b) The amount for the fee and interest payable,
(c) The method how the amount has been computed,
(d) The time, place and mode for making a compliant against the
assessment.
(5) It shall be as follows in assessing the fee and interest pursuant to this
Section:
(a) The matters contained in sub-section (1), sub-section (2), clause (b) of
sub-section (3), sub-sections (4) and (5) of Section 101 shall also be
applicable in assessing the fee and interest pursuant to this Section, and
(b) The matters contained in clauses (b) and ( c) of sub-section (3), subsections (4) and (5) of Section 101, and Section 102 shall also be
applicable in the case of sub-section (4) of this Section.
262Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-23
Offense and Punishment
123. Punishment to one who does not pay tax: A person who does not pay tax, without any
reasonable ground, by the due date for payment of tax shall be punished with a fine of a
sum from five thousand rupees to thirty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term
from one month to three months or with both punishments.
124. Punishment to one who submits false or misleading statement: If any information or
statement submitted by any person to the Department is false or misleading because of
submission with intention or recklessness or that information becomes misleading since
such person has not mentionedinformation of any particular matter or thing in the
statement in respect of such subject, such person shall be punished with a fine of a sum
from forty thousand rupees to one hundred sixty thousand rupees or with imprisonment
for a term from six months to two years or with both punishments.
Explanation:263 For the purposes of this Section, "any information or statement submitted
to the Department" means any statement/details submitted to the Department or the
officer authorized by the Department in the course of complying with the obligation
under this Act in writing and the statement/details submitted as follows:
(a) Application, notice, details, complaint, statement, or other documents
deposited, prepared, provided or submitted in accordance with this Act,
(b) Document submitted to the Department or any officer of the Department,
(c) Answers to the questions asked by the department or any officer to any
person, or
(d) Information provided by any person, having reasonable information of the
details to be provided, to the Department or any officer through any other
person.
125. Punishment to one who obstructs or unduly influences tax administration: (1) Any
person who commits the following act shall be punished with a fine of a sum from five
thousand rupees to twenty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term from one
month to three months or with both punishments:
(a) To obstruct the officer of the Department in the course of carrying out his
duty pursuant to this Act,
(b) Not to act as per the notice referred to in Section 83, or
(c) To obstruct in any other manner in the implementation of this Act.
(2) Any person who attempts to commit any act referred to in sub-section (I)
shall be punished with half a punishment mentioned in that sub-section.
126. Punishment in the event of commission of offence by the person with or without
authority: (I) Any authorized person who violates Section 84 shall be punished with a
263Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
fine of a sum not exceeding eighty thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year or with both punishments.
(2) If any person who is not authorized under this Act collects tax or any other
amount in the name of tax or attempts to collect the same, such a person shall be
punished with a fine of a sum from eighty thousand rupees to two hundred thousand
rupees or with imprisonment for a term from one year to three years or with both
punishments.
127. Punishment to accomplice: Any person who intentionally aids or abets or advises any
other person to commit any offense under this Act 264or certifies fake financial or tax
account or gives wrong advice shall be punished with half a punishment imposed on the
offender.
Provided that if such an accomplice is a governmental employee, he shall be
liable to punishment equal to the punishment imposed on the offender.
128. Punishment to one who does not observe the Act: Except as otherwise provided for in
this Act, any person who does not observe any provisions of this Act or the rules framed
under this Act shall be punished with a fine of a sum from five thousand rupees to thirty
thousand rupees.
129. Power of Department to pay amount of fine: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if any person admits in writing that he has committed any one
or more offenses mentioned in this Chapter, except the offense mentioned in Section
126, before the commencement of the court proceedings, the Department may order such
a person to pay the amount of fine not exceeding the amount of fine imposable for the
commission of such one or more than one offense.
(2) In making the order referred to in sub-section (1), the Department has to set
out in such an order such offense, the amount of fine to be paid and the date for payment
of the amount of fine.
(3) The order made by the Department pursuant to this Section shall be final and
no appeal may be made against it.
130. To be state cases: The cases under this Chapter shall be state cases.
131.Investigation and filing of cases: ( 1) The prescribed officer shall investigate the case on
the offense punishable under this Chapter, and case shall be filed in the concerned
District Court within thirtyfive days of the completion of such investigation.
(2) In conducting investigation pursuant to sub-section (1), the investigating
officer shall seek advice and opinion of the government attorney.
264Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)

Chapter-24
Miscellaneous
132. Power to obtain expert's service: The Government of Nepal or 265the Department may
obtain the service of the concerned expert for the act related to tax auditing; and the
provision on governmental secrecy mentioned in Section 84 shall also apply to such
expert.
133. Departmental action to be taken: If the liability of a taxpayer increases or decreases
because of the assessment of tax made with recklessness, the Director General may
institute departmental action to punish the concerned officer who has assessed such tax
or has not assessed the revised tax within the time limit referred to in subsection (3) of

Section 101.
134.Identity card of officer: Each officer has to hold the identity card as prescribed and show
such identity card where any one requests him to show it.
135. Powers of court of law to be vested: For the purposes of this Act, the Department shall
have the powers vested in a court under the law in force in the matters of summoning the
presence of the concerned person, recording of statements, examining evidence, and
compelling production of documents.
136. Not to be responsible for an act done in good faith: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act, no officer shall be personally responsible for any act which he or
she has done in good faith in carrying out the duties.
136A. 266 Provision for prize and informant's expenses: (1) A person who provides
information, along with the evidence, that any person has evaded, or attempted to evade,
whole or any portion of his tax liability may be awarded with the prize of amount equal
to twenty percent of the tax amount as assessed on the basis of the evidence submitted by
that person from the amount of tax recovered on the basis of his information, upon the
decision of the Director General.
(2) If there are more than one person entitled to the prize pursuant to sub-section
( 1 ), the amount of prize shall be provided on pro rata basis.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a person who gives
information on revenue leakage may be provided immediately with the informant's
expenses up to ten thousand rupees pursuant to the procedures specified by the
Department, on the basis of truthfulness of the information provided as such.
(4) The name, surname and address of the person providing information pursuant
to subsections (1) and (3) shall be kept confidential.
137. Power of the Government of Nepal to give order or direction: The Government of Nepal
may give necessary order or direction to the Department in order to make tax
administration effective.
265Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
266Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
138. Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may framenecessary rules in order to
carry out the objectives of this Act.
139. Power to make and enforce directives: The Department may make and enforce necessary
directives, subject to this Act and the rules framed under this Act.
140. Alteration in Schedule: The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, may make necessary alterations in the Schedules other than Schedule-1.
141. Police to render assistance: It shall be the duty of the Police to render such assistance as
sought by the Department on the implementation of this Act and the rules framed under
this Act.
142. This Act to prevail on tax provision: Notwithstanding anything contained m the law in
force, except if the Financial Act to be enforced in every year amends this Act and
provides for the imposition, assessment, increase, decrease, exemption, or remission of
tax, no other Act shall make other provisions on amendments to, alteration in, the tax
provisions referred to in this Act or other tax related provisions.
143. Repeal, amendment and saving: (1) The Income Tax Act, 2031 (1974) and the House
and Land Rent Tax Act, 2023 (966) are hereby repealed.
(2) The following Acts are hereby amended as follows:
(a) 267....................
(b) Amendment to the Employee Provident Fund Act, 2019 (1962): The words
"no tax of any kind except income tax shall be levied" shall be substituted for
the words "no tax of any kind shall be levied" contained at the end of clause (b)
of Section 18 of the Employee Provident Fund Act 2019 (1962).
(c) Amendment to the Nepal Petroleum Act, 2040 (1984): Clause (c) of Section
13 of the Nepal Petroleum Act, 2040 (1984) is hereby deleted.
(d) Amendment to Section 29 of the Retirement Fund Act, 2042 (1986): The
words "no tax of any kind except income tax shall be levied" shall be substituted
for the words "no tax of similar other kind shall be levied" contained in Section
29 of the Retirement Fund Act, 2042 (1986).
(e) Amendment to Section 51 of the Citizen Investment Fund Act, 2047 (1991):

Section 51 of the Citizen Investment Fund Act, 2047 (1991) is hereby repealed.
(f)Amendment to Section 30 of Nepal 268.... Academy for Science and
Technology Act, 2048 (1991): Section 30 of the Nepal269.... Academy for
Science and Technology Act, 2048 (1991) is hereby repealed.
(g) 270Amendment to Section 15 of the Industrial Enterprises Act, 2049 (1992):
267Deleted by the Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066 (2010).
268Deleted by Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066 (20 I 0).
269Deleted by Republic Strengthening and Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2066 (20 I 0).
(Unofficial Translation)
(1) Clauses (c), (d), (e), (j), (1), (p), (q), (r) and (s) of Section 15 of the
Industrial Enterprises Act, 2049 (1992) are hereby deleted.
(2) The words "respectively thirty, twenty-five and twenty percent on
the income tax until ten years of the date of operation and" contained
in clause ((t) are hereby deleted.
(h) Amendment to the Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer Act, 2049 (l
992): Sub-section (la.) of Section 5 of the Foreign Investment and Technology
Transfer Act, 2049 (1992) is hereby deleted.
(i) Amendment to the B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences Act, 2049
(1992): The word "income-tax" contained in the second line of Section 21 of the
B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences Act, 2049 (1992) is hereby deleted.
(j)Amendment to the Tribhuvan University Act, 2049 (1992): Sub-section (2) of

Section 33 of the Tribhuvan University Act, 2049 (1992) is hereby deleted.
(k) Amendment to the Electricity Act, 2049 (1992):
(1) The word "income-tax" contained in the heading of Section 12 of
the Electricity Act, 2049 (1992) is hereby deleted.
(2) Sub-sections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) are hereby deleted.
(l) Amendment to the Pokhara University Act, 2053 (1996): Sub-section (2) of

Section 36 of the Pokhara University Act, 2053( 1996) is hereby deleted.
(m) Amendment to Section 18 of the B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital
Act, 2053 (1996): The word "incometax" contained in sub-section (1) of Section
18 of the B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital Act, 2053 (1996) is hereby
deleted.
(n) Amendment to the Town Development Fund Act, 2053 (1996): Section 24 of
the Town Development Fund Act, 2053 (1996) is hereby repealed.
(o) Sub-section (1) of Section 34 of the Telecommunications Act, 2053(1996) is
hereby repealed.
(3) All acts and actions performed under the Acts or Sections of the Acts
repealed or amended pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2) shall be deemed to have been
performed under this Act.
(4) The provisions of the Income Tax Act, 2031(1974) shall apply to the
provisions relating to the assessment and collection of income tax for the income year
prior to the commencement of this Act.
Note: (1) Words converted by Some Nepal Law Amendment Act, 2063 (2006):
"Government of Nepal" instead of " His Majesty's Government"
270Already in force vide the Industrial Enterprises Act, 2073 (2016).
(Unofficial Translation)
(2) Words converted by the Administration of Justice Act, 2073 (2016): "High Court"
instead of "Appellate Court"
(Unofficial Translation)
Schedule-1
(Relating to Section 4)
Rates of Tax
1. In the case of individual: 271(1) Tax shall be levied by the following rate on the taxable
income of any resident individual in any income year, subject to sub-sections (2) and (4)
of this Schedule:
(a) Where the taxable income from employment is up to four hundred thousand
rupees, one percent,
(b) Where the taxable income is more than four hundred thousand rupees but less than
five hundred thousand rupees, four thousand rupees up to four hundred thousand
rupees pursuant to clause (a), and ten percent on the taxable income of more than
four hundred thousand rupees,
(c) Where the taxable income is more than five hundred thousand rupees but less than
seven hundred thousand rupees, fourteen thousand rupees up to five hundred
thousand rupees pursuant to clause (b), and twenty percent on the taxable income
of more than five hundred thousand rupees,
(d) Where the taxable income is more than seven hundred thousand rupees but less
than two million rupees, fifty four thousand rupees up to seven hundred thousand
rupees pursuant to clause (c), and thirty percent on the taxable income of more
than seven hundred thousand rupees,
(e) Where the taxable income is more than two million rupees, additional twenty
percent tax to the rate of tax under clause ( d), to the extent of the taxable income
that so exceeds.
Provided that the tax referred to in clause (a) shall not be levied on the income earned
by way of pension, in the case of a taxpayer registered as a sole trading firm, and on
the income of an individual making contribution to a pension fund or contributory
social security fund.
(2)272 Tax shall be levied by the following rate on the taxable income of any
couple making a choice pursuant to Section 50 in any income year, subject to subsection (4) of this Schedule:
(a) Where the taxable income from employment is up to four hundred fifty thousand
rupees, one percent,
(b) Where the taxable income is more than four hundred fifty thousand rupees but less
than five hundred fifty thousand rupees, four thousand five hundred rupees up to
271Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
272Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
four hundred fifty thousand rupees pursuant to clause (a), and ten percent on the
taxable income of more than four hundred fifty thousand rupees,
(c) Where the taxable income is more than five hundred fifty thousand rupees but less
than seven hundred fifty thousand rupees, fourteen thousand rupees up to five
hundred fifty thousand rupees pursuant to clause (b), and twenty percent on the
taxable income of more than five hundred fifty thousand rupees,
(d) Where the taxable income is more than seven hundred fifty thousand rupees but
less than two million rupees, fifty-four thousand rupees up to seven hundred fifty
thousand rupees pursuant to clause (c), and thirty percent on the taxable income of
more than seven hundred fifty thousand rupees,
(e) Where the taxable income is more than two million rupees, additional twenty
percent tax to the rate of tax under clause ( d), to the extent of the taxable income
that so exceeds.
273Provided that the tax referred to in clause (a) shall not be levied on the income
earned by way of pension, in the case of a taxpayer registered as a sole trading firm,
and on the income of an individual making contribution to a pension fund or
contributory social security fund.
(3) 274 The provision contained in sub-section ( 4) of this Schedule shall apply
in the following circumstances:
(a) In the case of a resident individual, where the income is more than four hundred
thousand rupees in any income year or in the case of a resident couple who has
made a choice referred to in Section 50, where the income is more than four
hundred fifty thousand rupees m any income year, and
(b) Where the net profit derived from the disposal of non-business taxable assets is
included in the computation of the income and corresponding taxable income of
that individual or couple.
(4)275 Tax shall be levied on the following person as follows, subject to subsection (3) of this Schedule:
(a) Tax shall be levied at the rate referred to in sub-section (1) or (2) of this Schedule
on the amount whichever is higher of the following amounts, as if only it were the
taxable income of that individual or couple:
(1) The amount remaining balance after subtracting the amount of profits from
the total taxable income of that individual or couple,
(2) Four hundred thousand rupees, in the case of that individual, or four
hundred fifty thousand rupees, in the case of that couple.
(b) Tax shall be levied by ten percent on the remaining amount of that taxable income.
273 Amended by the Financial Act, 2077 (2020).
274Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
275Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
(Unofficial Translation)
Provided that,
(1) Tax shall be levied at the rate of two and half percent if the ownership of disposed
non-business taxable assets (land and house) is of five years or more than five years.
(2) Tax shall be levied at the rate of five percent if the ownership of disposed nonbusiness taxable assets (land and house) is of less than five years.
(3) Tax shall be levied at the rate of five percent on the profit earned from the disposal
of interest in entity enlisted in the Securities Board of Nepal.
(5) For an individual working in such remote area as specified by the Government of
Nepal, a maximum sum of fifty thousand rupees for the remote allowance shall be deducted
as prescribed from the taxable income, and tax shall be computed only on the remaining
pursuant to this Section.
(6) For an employee working in a diplomatic mission of Nepal situated abroad,
seventy-five percent amount of the foreign allowance shall be deducted from the taxable
income, and tax shall be computed on the remaining pursuant to this Section.
(7) The amount of tax pursuant to sub-section (4) of Section 4 of this Act shall be as
follows:
(a) In the case of an individual carrying on a business in the area of a Municipal
Corporation or Sub-Municipal Corporation, seven thousand five hundred rupees,
(b) In the case of an individual carrying on a business in the area of a Municipality,
four thousand rupees,
(c) In the case of an individual carrying on a business in any place other than that
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b), two thousand five hundred rupees.
(8) Tax shall be levied by twenty-five percent on the taxable income of a non-resident
individual in any income year.
(9) 276………
(10)277 Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, where any
resident individual is a person with disability, tax shall be computed pursuant to this Section
only on the amount remaining balance after subtracting from the taxable income an additional
fifty percent of the amount mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) for the individual or in
clause (a) of sub-section (2) for the couple.
(11)278 Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, where any
resident individual is a woman earning income only as remuneration, such individual shall
get ten percent exemption from the tax amount to be paid by him or her.
276Deleted by the Financial Act, 2077 (2020).
277Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
278Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(12)279 Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, where any
resident individual has made investment insurance, tax shall be computed only in the amount
that remains after deduction of the annual premium or twenty-five thousand rupees,whichever
is lesser, from the taxable income.
(13)280 Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the following
annual tax shall be recovered from the owner of a rented motor vehicle at the time of
registration and renewal of the vehicle through the Department of Transport Management:
Type of motor vehicle
Annual tax payable per vehicle
(1) Car, jeep, van, micro bus
(a) up to 1300 cc
Rs.4,000/-
(b) from 1300 cc to 2000 cc
Rs.4,500/-
(c) from 2001 cc to 2900 cc
Rs.5,000/-
(d) from 2901cc to 4000 cc
Rs.6,000/-
(e) from 4001 cc to all above
Rs.7,000/-
(2) Mini truck, minibus, water tanker
Rs.6,000/-
(3) Mini tipper
Rs.7,000/-
(4) Truck, bus
Rs.8,000/-
(5) Machinery equipment such as dodger
excavator, loader, roller, crane
Rs.12,000/,
(6) Oil tanker, gas bullet, tipper
Rs.12, 000/-
(7) Tractor
Rs.2,000-
(8) Power tiller
Rs.1,500-
(9) Auto rickshaw, three-wheeler, tempo
Rs.2,000/
(14) 281………
(15) 282………
(16) 283Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, where any
resident individual has procured health insurance from any insurance company, tax shall
be computed, in accordance with this Section, only in the amount that remains after
deducting the annual premium paid for such insurance or twenty thousand rupees,
whichever is lesser, from the taxable income.
(17) In computing tax for transaction turnover pursuant to sub-section (4a) of Section
4 of this Act, tax referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 4 of this Act shall be levied on
the amount of up to two million rupees, and tax shall be levied at the following rate on
the transaction turnover exceeding that:
(a) for a person conducting transaction of goods including gas, cigarette by adding up
to three percent commission or price, 0.25 percent of the transaction turnover,
279Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
280Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
281Deleted by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
282Deleted by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
283Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(b) for a person conducting a business other than that mentioned in clause (a), 0.75
percent of the transaction turnover,
(c) for a person conducting a service business, two percent of the transaction amount.
2 .In the case of entity: (1) Tax shall be levied by twenty-five percent on the taxable income
of any entity in any income year, subject to 284sub-sections (2), (3), (5) and (7) of this
Section.
(2) Tax shall be levied at the rate of thirty percent on the taxable income of
any bank, financial institution, an entity carrying on general insurance business 285or
telecommunication and internet service, money transfer, capital market business, securities
business, merchant banking business, commodity future market, securities and
commodities broker business, conducting transaction of cigarette, bidi. cigar, chewing
tobacco, powder tobacco, gutkha,panmasala. liquor, beer or petroleum works pursuant to
the Nepal Petroleum Act, 2040( 1983 ), in any income year.
Explanation: "Taxable income", in the case of petroleum works, means the taxable income
assessed in accordance with the procedures mentioned in the petroleum agreement and this
Act and the Rules framed under this Act.
(3)286 Tax shall be levied as follows on the transaction, except exempt transaction
of cooperatives registered under the Cooperatives Act, 2074 (2017).
(a) If being operated in the area of a Municipality, five percent,
(b) If being operated in the area of a Sub-metropolitan city, seven percent,
(c) If being operated in the area of a Metropolitan city, ten percent,
(3a)287.................
(4)288 .................
(5)289Tax shall be levied pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (4) of Section 1 of this
Schedule on the taxable income of a person acquiring or taking care of the property of
any deceased resident person, or of a trust of a resident individual with disability as if
such person acquiring or taking care of such property or such trust were a resident
individual.
(6) Tax shall be levied at the rate of 290five percent on the income sent abroad by any
non-resident person's foreign permanent establishment situated in Nepal in any income
year.
284Amended by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
285Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
286Amended by the Financial Act, 2077 (2020).
287Deleted by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
288Deleted by the Financial Act, 2076 (2019).
289Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
290Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(7)291 Tax shall be levied at the rate of five percent on the taxable income of any nonresident person in respect of the income mentioned in Section 70 in any income year.
Provided that tax shall be levied at the rate of two percent in the case of a nonresidential person providing water transport, air transport or telecommunication
service that does not so depart or transmit from Nepal as not to reach another foreign
country.
291Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
Schedule-2
(Relating to Section 19)
Assessment of Depreciation Deduction
1. Categorization and classification of depreciable property: (1) The depreciable
property shall be categorized as follows:
Category Description of property
Building, structure and similar other structures of permanent nature.
Computer, data processing equipment, furniture, fixture and office
equipment.
Automobiles, buses and mini-buses.
Construction and excavation equipment, and the depreciable properties
not included elsewhere including in sub-section (3) of Section 17, subsection (3) of Section 18, and sub-section (3) of this Schedule.
Intangible properties except the depreciable properties mentioned in
category "D".
(2) Any depreciable property owned and used by any person in any income
year in making income from a business or investment shall be placed in the category
as follows at the time when it came under ownership or came in use for the first time,
and the categories shall be deemed as the category of the depreciable property of that
person in that year:
(a) In respect of the similar properties under ownership or in use of that person, the
depreciable properties referred to in categories "A" "B" "C" or "D" in the same
category of other properties of that category.
(b) In respect of the depreciable property referred to in category "E", they have to be
placed under different classes notwithstanding that the properties are of the same
category.
(3) The cost incurred in the excavation of natural resources, extraction of
minerals and its development in the course of earning income from a business shall be
deemed as the cost incurred in purchasing the property for the business related with
that income.
2. Depreciation cost: (1) Any person may, in any income year, deduct cost equivalent to the
depreciation in that year of the property of each class computed pursuant to sub-sections
(2) and (6) of this Section, for the classes of the depreciable properties belonging to that
person.
(2) A person has to compute the depreciation deduction of the properties of the
class in his income year by using the following formula:
(Unofficial Translation)
"A" means the depreciation base amount in the class of the property at the end of that
income year.
"B" means the rate of depreciation deduction mentioned in Section 3 of this Schedule,
applicable to that class.
(3) The depreciation base amount of the depreciable properties in category
"A", "B", "C" or "D" at the end of any income year has to be set by subtracting the
amount referred to in the following clause (c) from the total of the following clauses
(a) and (b).
Provided that the amount so subtracted shall not be less than zero:
(a) The remaining amount after deducting depreciation cost of that class computed
pursuant to sub-sections (2) and (6) from the depreciation deduction base amount
of that class at the end of last year.
(b) The expenses referred to in 292sub-section (5) of this Schedule or added to the
class within that income year and incurred for the properties added to that class,
on the depreciation deduction base amount of that class in that year.
(c) Any amount derived from the disposal of any property of that class in that year.
(4) The depreciation deduction base amount of each depreciable property in
category "D" at the end of any income year shall be a total sum of the following
amounts:
(a) The depreciation deduction base amount of the depreciable properties remaining in
the class at the end of last income year, and
(b) The amount added pursuant to sub-section (5) for the property within that class to
the depreciation deduction base amount in that fiscal year.
(5) The cost incurred for any depreciable property included in any class of the
depreciable property belonging to any person has to be added as follows to the
depreciation base amount of the class concerned:
(a) That property has to be computed as per the following formula and added by
considering the first value in the time whichever is later out of the time in which
that property is included in the class pursuant to Section 1 and the time in which
expenses are made to acquire that property:
A/3XB
For purposes of this clause, "A' shall have the following value for the following
period:
(i) The end time of the period from the beginning of the income year to the last day of
Poush (mid-January) shall be three,
292Amended by the Financial Act, 2075 (2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
(ii) The period from Magha (January/February) to the last day of Chaitra (13 April)
shall be two, and
(iii) The period from Baisakh (April/May) to the last day of the income year shall be
"B" means that that cost amount.
(b) The remaining part of the cost shall be added in the income year following the
income year in which the first part was added.
Provided that the class was not dissolved pursuant to sub-section (2) of

Section 4 of this Schedule in the meantime of that period.
(6) Where, in deducting the depreciation cost to be computed pursuant to subsection (2) of this Section from the depreciation deduction base amount of the
depreciable properties of categories "A" "B" "C" or "D" it be less than two thousand
rupees all the remaining amounts has to be computed for additional depreciation cost.
3. Rate of depreciation: (1) The rate of depreciation applicable in the case of each class
mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 2 of this Schedule shall, subject to sub-section (2),
be as follows:
Category
5 percent
25 percent
20 percent
15 percent
The rate, in percentage, to be set by adjusting in the nearest half
year after dividing the cost of that property at the time of its
purchase by the period of use of that property.
(2) The projects mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 19 of this Act and
Sub section (2b),(3f), (3 q) of Section 11 and the entities mentioned in sub-sections
(3) and ( 4) of Section 2 of Schedule-I shall get an addition of one-thirds to the rate of
depreciation applicable to the depreciable assets mentioned in categories "A", "B",
"C" and "D" mentioned in sub-section (1) of this Schedule.
(3)293 Any person may claim fifty percent of the capitalized amount of the
property capitalized for the generation of energy required for his or her business
purpose, for depreciation cost in the same year.
(4)294 Where any person has issued bills, invoices through a fiscal printer and
cash machine, that person may claim a lump sum of the expenses incurred in such
printer and cash machine, for depreciation cost in the same year.
293Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
294Inserted by the Financial Act, 2075(2018).
(Unofficial Translation)
4. Disposal of depreciable property: (1) If clause (a) is more than clause (b) in computing the
income of any person from the disposal of the depreciable property or properties used in
the business or investment in that income year, such excess amount has to be included in
the income.
(a) The incomings derived from the disposal of his depreciable property in any
income year falling in category "A", "B", "C" or "D" of the class of any person.
(b) The depreciation deduction base amount remaining at the end of that year of
the class pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 2 of this Schedule, without
including the income derived from the disposal.
(2) If any person disposes all the properties in the class of depreciable property
of that person prior to the expiration of any income year, the class shall be deemed to
be dissolved, and it shall be as follows:
(a) Where the depreciation deduction amount to be set in computing depreciation
as per the following formula of the property in the class of depreciable property is
more than the depreciation deduction base amount, that person shall be deemed to
have received such excess amount for that year.
A-B or
(b) Where the depreciation deduction amount to be set in computing depreciation
as per the following formula of the property in the class of depreciable property is
more than the depreciation deduction base amount, that person shall get remission
of such excess amount of expenses in that year.
Explanation: For purposes of this Section, -
(1) "A" means the incomings derived or to be derived by any person from the
disposal of that property in that year,
(2) "B' means the total amount of clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) as follows:
(i) The remaining value of the descending system of the class in that year,
(ii) The outgoings of that year added to the depreciation base amount of the
class, and
(iii) The outgoings to be added to the depreciation base amount of the class in
the forthcoming year pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 2.
(3) For purposes of this Schedule, the remaining value of the descending
system of the class of depreciable property in any income year means the following
amount:
(a) In the case of category "A", "B", "C" or "D" of the class, of any person, the
amount to be set by subtracting depreciation, if any, of the class computed
pursuant to sub-sections (2) and (6) of Section 2 of this Schedule for that year
(Unofficial Translation)
from the depreciation base amount remaining at the end of the preceding
income year of that class,
(b) In the case of category "D" of the class, the amount to be set by subtracting
all the expenses of the preceding income years which the person is allowed to
deduct pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 2 of this Schedule 2 from the
depreciation base amount remaining at the end of preceding income year.
-***-

===== SOURCE: The Public Health Service Act(2075).pdf =====

The Public Health Service Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 11 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Public Health Service
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary legal provisions for implementing the right
to get free basic health service and emergency health service guaranteed by the Constitution of
Nepal and establishing access of the citizens to health service by making it regular, effective,
qualitative and easily available,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Public Health
Service Act, 2075 (2018)."
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act-
"Emergency health service" means the initial and immediate service to be
provided as it is necessary to free the lives of the persons from risk, save the
lives or organs from being lost, whose lives are in the risky condition upon
falling into unexpected incident or emergency condition.
"Basic health service" means promotional, retributive, diagnostic, remedial and
rehabilitative service easily and freely available from the state for the sake of
fulfillment of health need of citizens generally, pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 3.
"Non-governmental or private health institution" means a health institution
operated with the investment and ownership of the non-governmental or private
sector, upon receiving permission under the prevailing law.
"Physician" means a person registered in the concerned Council as a physician
under the prevailing law.
"Public health supervisor" means the office-bearer designated for monitoring
and regulation related to public health.
"Risk zone" means a workplace with any chemical, biological, climate change
based, psycho-social, corporal, physical and geographic condition adversely
affecting the human health due to workplace or nature of work, and this term
also includes the possible risk likely to occur upon the health workers at the
time of health treatment as well.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the rules
framed under this Act.
"Traditional treatment provider" means a person providing treatment
traditionally through herbs, Jantav and minerals.
"Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal responsible for
matters relating to health and population of the Government of Nepal.
"Committee" means the National Public Health Committee referred to in

Section 50.
"Government health institution" means the health institution operated by the
Federal, Provincial and Local Levels.
"Community health worker" means a health worker as well as a woman health
volunteer working in the institution or community after having prescribed
qualification or training from the recognized institute on the subject of health
service.
"Service recipient" means the person receiving health service in a health
institution.
"Service provider" means a physician, health worker and community health
worker working in a health institution after achieving certain qualification or
training on the subject of health service from a recognized health institute.
"Health worker" means a person registered in the concerned Council as a health
worker under the prevailing law.
"Health service" means retributive, promotional, diagnostic, remedial,
rehabilitative and palliative service provided, based on modern treatment
(allopathy), Ayurved, homeopathy, Unani, natural treatment, acupuncture,
Sowarigpa (Amchi) treatment system.
"Health institution" means a government health institution, and this term also
includes a non-governmental or private, or cooperative or non-profit-making
community health institution established under the prevailing law.

Chapter-2
Rights, Duties of Service Recipients and Responsibilities of Health Institutions
Access to and certainty of health service: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to
obtain quality health service in an easy and convenient manner.
(2) For the purposes of getting the service referred to in sub-section (1), it shall
be the duty of every citizen to be involved in the programs relating to health as
prescribed by the Government of Nepal, from time to time, under the prevailing law.
(3) No citizen shall be deprived of health service.
(4) Every citizen shall have the right to obtain free basic health services under
the following headings, as prescribed:
Vaccination service,
Motherhood, infant and pediatric health service such as integrated infant
and pediatric disease management, nutrition service, pregnancy, labor
and child birth service, family planning, abortion and reproductive
health,
Service relating to communicable disease,
Service relating to non-communicable disease and physical disability,
Service relating to mental disease,
Service relating to elderly citizen's health,
Service of general emergency condition,
Health promotion service,
Ayurveda and other accredited alternative health service,
Other services prescribed by the Government of Nepal by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
(5) The Provincial and Local Governments may make necessary addition to the
basic health services determined by the Government of Nepal pursuant to sub-section
(6) The concerned government shall bear the burden of financial expenses of
the services added under sub-section (5).
(7) Other provisions and processes relating to detailed descriptions, service flow
and management of the services referred to in sub-section (4) shall be as prescribed by
the Ministry.
(8) The Local Level may provide the basic health service in partnership with
any health institutions operated under the Province and the Federation.
Emergency treatment: (1) Every health institution shall provide emergency health
service as prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of each health institution and health worker to provide
health service referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if emergency health
service is not available in any health institution, such health institution, after providing
treatment available at such an institution, shall refer to another health institution for
additional treatment.
(4) The expenses of treatment under this Section shall be borne by health
insurance if it has been made, and by the person concerned, his or her guardian, family
member, patron or the person who has accepted patronage if health insurance has not
been in effect or the amount of health insurance is not sufficient to cover the expenses.
Provided that the health institution shall provide the health service under the
basic health service without charge.
(5) While providing emergency health service under this Section, the concerned
service recipient shall be required to adopt the process to be fulfilled for obtaining such
service only after starting the treatment.
(6) Other provisions relating to emergency treatment service shall be as
prescribed.
Specialist service: (1) The Government of Nepal shall provide specialized services
prescribed as necessary on the basis of nature of service, geographical condition and
the rate of epidemic of the disease.
(2) The Provincial Government shall provide specialist's service as per the
standards prescribed by the Federal law.
(3) Other matters relating to the provision of the specialist's services shall be as
prescribed.
Referral service: (1) Every health institution shall, after providing service available in
its institution, if there is no possibility to provide further treatment to the patient who
comes for treatment due to the structure, equipment of its health institution, lack of
specialist's service or any other appropriate cause, refer immediately to the health
institution that can provide additional treatment to such a patient.
(2) While referring pursuant to Sub-section (1), the health institution shall fulfill
the methods and procedures as prescribed.
(3) After establishing necessary referral system among health institutions that
provide specialist's service and basic health service, the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government and Local Level shall make necessary arrangement to make the
service effective.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, while
referring the patient undergoing emergency treatment, referral shall be made by the
referrer health institution, along with minimum equipment and available health facility
available with it.
To provide quality health service: (1) The Government of Nepal shall make
arrangement for providing every citizen with quality health service from a health
institution.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall, in order to provide the citizen with health
service based on available resources and means, perform the following functions:
To determine policy for the protection and promotion of the health of
citizens,
To provide service in an egalitarian manner by determining priority of
health service.
(3) The Federation, Province and Local Level shall, in order to implement this
Act, make arrangement for human resources, technology and equipment in such
institution on the basis of necessity after establishing health institution that have
fulfilled the prescribed standards.
Duties of service recipient: The duties of the service recipient receiving service from
a health institution or health worker shall be as follows:
To be aware regarding his or her own health, adopt healthy life style,
profess yoga and physical exercise and use the service provided by the
health institution,
To comply with the rules of the health institution by the person receiving
health service,
To provide the health institution with actual information related to own
health condition, and to help the health worker in the course of obtaining
health service,
To respect and honor the health worker and health institution,
Not to commit any act that constitutes physical, mental and gender
violence against a health worker,
To sign on treatment or discharge card by mentioning in case of refusal
made to receive partial or full treatment recommended,
To obtain service upon visiting the health institution referred by the
health institution subject to Section 6.
Responsibility for getting treated: If any family member, patron or any person, whose
patronage has been accepted falls ill, the guardian, family member, patron and the
person who has accepted patronage shall have the responsibility to take such a person
to a health institution, get treated, bear treatment expenses and help and facilitate in the
treatment.
To provide service recipient with information: (1) Every health institution and health
worker providing treatment shall provide the service recipient with information on the
following matters:
Regarding his or her condition of health and treatment of every service
recipient,
Provided that if there is a sufficient ground that it may be against
the interest of him or her or the community while providing information
of the health of the service recipient, it shall not bar the health institution
from keeping such information as confidential.
Regarding diagnosis of the illness, natural effect of the diagnosed illness
and standards, and alternative of, the service related to treatment,
Regarding estimated expenses and potential result related to alternative
health treatment,
Regarding the refusal of health service likely to be made by the service
recipient, and potential result, risk and liability likely to arise while
refusing the service.
(2) While providing the service recipient with information referred to in subsection (1), the health institution shall provide such information in a language he or she
can understand, as far as possible.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), if there is
no condition to provide the information of the service recipient's health condition to the
concerned service recipient, such information shall be provided to the adult member of
his or her family.
To obtain informed consent of service recipient: (1) Every health institution shall
obtain informed consent of the service recipient, while providing him or her with health
service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "informed consent"
means written or oral consent given by a person who is legally competent to obtain
health service.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), written consent shall be obtained to
provide the prescribed treatment.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and (2), health
service may be provided without informed consent of the service recipient in any of the
following circumstances:
If the service recipient is not in a condition to give consent or has not
given anyone else permission or authority to give such consent, his or
her wife or husband, father or mother, grandfather or grandmother, adult
son or daughter, brother or sister so far as available respectively or
available closest person of the service recipient who has given such
consent.
If the health service has been provided without consent under the
prevailing law or by an order of the court,
If there is a serious threat likely to occur upon public health if any person
is not treated,
If there is a possibility of death of the concerned patient or likely to occur
irreparable damage to his or her health if it is delayed to provide health
service,
If the concerned person has not refused to obtain health service in an
expressed or unexpressed manner or by conduct,
In other cases as prescribed.
To behave equally: (1) While carrying out treatment pursuant to this Act, it shall be
the duty of the concerned health worker to behave equally and respectfully towards all
the service recipients.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a health institution
may prioritize on the basis of the seriousness of the health of the patient while carrying
out treatment.
(3) No health institution shall discriminate, or cause to be discriminated, anyone
in the treatment on the basis of his or her origin, religion, race, caste, ethnicity, gender,
occupation, sexual and gender identity, physical or health condition, disability, marital
status, pregnancy, ideology or similar other basis as such.
Professional conduct: Health institutions and health workers shall comply with the
professional conduct as determined by the concerned councils.
To maintain confidentiality: (1) While providing health service, information
including health condition of the service recipient, diagnosis or treatment obtained by
him or her shall be kept confidential.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prevent the information from being published, in any of
the following circumstances:
If the service recipient gives written consent to publish the information,
If any information is to be published in accordance with the order of the
court or prevailing law,
If it appears to have serious impact in public health if information is not
published.
For the purposes of clause (c) of sub-section (2), it shall be in accordance
with the decision made by the prescribed official regarding whether serious impact is
going to occur in the public health.
To provide discharge summary: Each health institution shall provide the patient, who
has undergone treatment upon getting admission to such an institution, with a discharge
summary, along with the information as prescribed, while discharging such a patient.
Liability of health institution: (1) Each health institution shall provide health service
from a qualified service provider only.
(2) Each health institution shall adopt necessary safety measures towards not
spreading infection and preventing any disease.
(3) Each health institution shall make arrangement for the transmission of
following information relating to health service provided by it:
Available health service, its nature, estimated time and cost needed,
Work operation table and time schedule of physicians or health workers,
Procedures to establish access to health service,
Procedures relating to complaint management.
To provide information to local administration: (1) In case anybody takes a person
to any health institution for the treatment due to accident or any other reason, such a
health institution shall provide such a person with treatment service as immediately
available with it, and if such person is not identified, it shall provide such information
to the concerned local administration.
(2) While providing information pursuant to sub-section (1), the health
institution shall provide information of the person treated and other information related
to him or her as far as available.
(3) After receiving information pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), the local
administration shall give information by searching for the family or guardian of the
concerned person.
To make a complaint: If additional complication appears in the health of any service
recipient in the course of treatment or if he or she has some doubt in the process of
treatment, he or she may make a complaint as prescribed to the prescribed authority
against the health worker and health institution involved in the treatment.
To impose condition and restriction: The chief of the health institution may impose
certain conditions and restrictions in the service to be provided by the health institution
on the basis of health condition of the service provider under the prevailing law.
To adopt necessary measures: Each health institution shall, subject to the prevailing
law, adopt necessary measures towards the safety of the employees and preventing
infection and disease.

Chapter-3
Relating to Health System and Management of Service
Operation and regulation of health institutions: (1) The provisions relating to levelwise structure of the health institutions and the services to be provided by such
institutions shall be as prescribed by the Ministry.
(2) Minimum standards relating to health institutions and the services shall be
as determined by the Ministry.
(3) Each health institution shall provide services subject to the standards
referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The health institutions established and in operation prior to the
commencement of this Act, shall fulfill the standard prescribed pursuant to sub-section
(2) within the time specified by the Ministry.
(5) The Federal, Provincial and Local Levels may, in order to provide health
service, carry out necessary partnership with private or non-governmental health
institutions.
(6) The Government of Nepal may determine the standards, license and
regulation of the services to be provided by the private and non-governmental, private
or cooperative, or non-profit-making or community health institutions by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette,
(7) The Federation, concerned Province or Local Level may issue license to
operate any health institution pursuant to the standards determined under sub-section
(8) The provisions relating to issuing license to any health institution referred
to in sub-section (7), and renewal thereof and carrying out monitoring, evaluation and
regulation of such a health institution shall be in accordance with the Provincial and
Local law.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (8), the Provincial and
Local Levels may issue a license, renew and carry out monitoring and regulation of any
health institution under this Act, until the enactment of the Provincial and Local laws.
To obtain license: (1) A non-governmental or private health institution shall provide
health service only after obtaining the license as prescribed.
(2) The health institution in operation at the time of the commencement of this
Act without obtaining the license shall obtain the license pursuant to sub-section (1)
within the time prescribed by the Ministry.
(3) In the case of the traditional treatment service, service shall be provided after
obtaining approval pursuant to the standards prescribed by the Local Level.
To be ipso facto terminated: The license of a health institution that does not meet the
standards prescribed under Section 21 and operating without obtaining the license
under Section 22 shall be deemed to have been ipso facto terminated.
To provide health service from elsewhere except health institution: (1) The Local
Level and Provincial Government may provide school health service in cooperation
with the educational institutions.
(2) The nature and standards of the school health service to be provided pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the Province and Local Level.
(3) Any health institution may conduct specialist's service through mobile
camps by obtaining permission from the prescribed body of the concerned Province.
(4) The process and standards to be fulfilled while providing mobile health
camp pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be as prescribed by the Provincial Government.
(5) The process and standards to be fulfilled while providing health service from
door to door shall be as prescribed by the Local Level.
To maintain quality by health institution: (1) The quality of the service to be
provided by a health institution shall be ensured in accordance with the Federal law.
(2) The Ministry may implement, or cause to be implemented by making
standards of health services.
(3) The prescribed body shall carry out monitoring and evaluation from time to
time as to whether the standards referred to in this Section have been fulfilled or not.
(4) Each health institution shall have the duty to comply with the directives
given by the concerned body after the monitoring and evaluation carried out pursuant
to sub-section (3).
Human resource management and development: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
prepare and enforce the policy and standards relating to development, distribution and
use of human resource of the health sector.
(2) While prescribing standards referred to in sub-section (1), such standards
shall be prescribed on the basis of estimation of human resources, technology and
equipment by analyzing and mapping of long-term, mid-term and immediate
requirements for the development, management and use of human resource.
Investigation, regulation, quality measurement and monitoring: (1) The
Government of Nepal and the prescribed body may conduct regulation, inspection,
monitoring, investigation and evaluation as to whether or not the health institution and
service provider have maintained the quality pursuant to the prescribed standards.
(2) If it appears, from the result of the inspection, investigation and monitoring
carried out pursuant to sub-section (1), that public health would be affected due to non
compliance of the set standards by the institution, the body providing approval for the
establishment and operation of the institution may give order that may include even the
closing of such an institution.
(3) The concerned Government shall have the responsibility to close or cause to
be closed such an institution pursuant to the order referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) Appropriate mechanism shall be constituted in order to conduct an
investigation, regulation, measurement of quality, monitoring and evaluation.
Health finance and social security: (1) A separate health fund shall be set up out of
the amount collected from the tax to be imposed for controlling the production of goods
and activities that affect public health.
(2) The following amount shall be credited to the fund referred to in sub-section
Amount received from the Government of Nepal,
Amount received from the Provincial Government,
Amount received from the Local Level,
Amount received from any non-governmental and private organization
and institution,
Amount received from any foreign organization and institution.
(3) The amount of the fund set up pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be spent in
the areas of public health.
(4) The provisions relating to the operation of fund set up pursuant to subsection (3) shall be as prescribed.
(5) The provisions relating to health insurance of the citizens shall be in
accordance with the prevailing law.
Provisions relating to price of medicine, prescription, pharmacy and free
medicine: (1) The physicians and health workers shall, while prescribing a medicine,
write a generic name of the medicine.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in the case of
qualitative domestic products, act shall be done within two years from the date of the
commencement of this Section so as to make such act consistent with sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in the case of a
patent and new medicine, it shall not prevent from recommending with the brand name.
(4) Each government hospital shall ensure regular availability of medicine with
fair price by operating the pharmacy of its own.
(5) Determination of the price of medicines shall be as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.
(6) Each health institution and service provider shall have to comply with the
standard treatment system so that medicines will be properly used and promoted.
(7) The drug seller shall make necessary arrangement for the storage, sale and
distribution of medicines by maintaining quality of medicines as prescribed.
(8) The drug seller shall not sell and distribute any medicine without the
prescription of the physician.
(9) Other provisions relating to medicines shall be in accordance with the
prevailing law.
Not to provide expenses for foreign treatment: Notwithstanding anything contained
in the prevailing law, if any person is to be treated in a foreign country, the expenses to
be spent on this shall not be made available by the Government of Nepal.
To provide extended hospital service: (1) A health institution may provide extended
hospital service as necessary on the basis of available resources, means and human
resources.
(2) Such health institution shall provide the physicians and health workers
providing service pursuant to sub-section (1) with additional allowances and other
incentives for providing such service.
Not allowed to serve elsewhere: (1) Any physician, health worker or the employee
working in a government hospital and health institution shall not serve elsewhere during
the time prescribed by the concerned body.
(2) If any physician, health worker or employee wishes to serve elsewhere
during the time other than the time mentioned in sub-section (1), he or she shall obtain
prior approval of the concerned body.
Power to set up emergency health treatment fund: (1) The Ministry and Provincial
Government shall set up an emergency health treatment fund to make arrangements for
bearing the expenses of treatment of the poor and destitute, the person whose house and
address is not traced, the family members of a martyr who sacrificed life in the course
of popular movement, armed struggle and revolution, the family of the enforced
disappeared person, the warrior of democracy, conflict victim and the displaced, the
disabled, the wounded and the victim, in the case of not being able to bear the expenses
incurred in treatment.
(2) The provisions relating to the operation of the fund referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-4
Blood, Use of Blood Based Substances and Human Organs Transplant
Blood transmission service: (1) Only the institution which has obtained the license
issued by the Ministry shall provide blood transmission service.
(2) By setting up units at different places for providing blood transmission
service, the institution obtaining the license pursuant to sub-section (1) shall provide
blood transmission service and other related services subject to the license.
(3) While providing the service to the recipient, the institution providing blood
transmission service pursuant to sub-section (1), shall only provide the blood having no
infection of any kind of disease.
(4) Other provisions relating to issuing license and renewal thereof in
accordance with this Section shall be as prescribed.
Human organs transplant and use: The provisions relating to human organs
transplant shall be in accordance with the prevailing law.
To conduct and manage autopsy: (1) The authorized physician shall, in order to
conduct autopsy under the prevailing law, conduct autopsy as prescribed.
(2) After autopsy, unclaimed dead body may be utilized in the studies of medical
sciences after fulfilling the process prescribed.
To manage ambulance and vehicle for corpse: (1) The health institution as prescribed
by the Ministry shall provide the service of ambulance and vehicle for corpse subject
to the standards prescribed.
(2) Other provisions relating to the operation of service of ambulance and
vehicle for corpse shall be as prescribed.
Identification of cause of human death: If someone dies while undergoing treatment
in a health institution, examinations shall be held, as prescribed, in order to identify the
cause of the death.

Chapter-5
Social, Cultural and Environmental Determinants for
Protection, Promotion and Improvement of Public Health
Quality of consumable goods: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in order to make
the products, storage, sale and distribution of the consumable goods including food,
meat and water, qualitative and fair, prescribe the minimum quality standards in
accordance with the Federal law.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Province, Local Level and all the concerned to
comply with the standards referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Other provisions relating to the quality of consumable goods shall be in
accordance with the prevailing law.
Noise and air pollution: (1) The Government of Nepal may, for reducing the effect to
the public health by noise, air, water and visibility pollutions, determine standards
regarding this in accordance with the Federal law.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Province, Local Level, general public,
entrepreneurs, businesspersons, organizations and institutions to comply with the
standards referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The Government of Nepal shall, for reducing the effect to the public health
by sound, air, water and visibility pollutions, determine standards as to the noise, air,
water, and visibility pollution in accordance with the Federal law.
Sanitation and waste management: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in order to
control or cause to be controlled the adverse effect to the human health by
environmental pollution and waste, make necessary standards in accordance with the
prevailing Federal law.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make necessary standards for collecting,
reusing, refining, disposing and regulating the health friendly waste.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Provincial and Local Level to comply with the
standards referred to in sub-section (1) and (2).
(4) Each health institution shall manage the risk-free and risky waste by
separating them pursuant to the prescribed standards.
(5) Each health institution shall provide the service providers with clean
drinking water pursuant to the prescribed standards.
Public health friendly residence, public transport and road infrastructure and
safety: (1) While constructing residence area, the standards and quality prescribed by
the Federal law shall be maintained for making health friendly.
(2) While constructing road infrastructures, construction shall be made to
reduce road accidents and considering health promotion. While upgrading the standard
of the newly constructed and old roads, arrangement shall be made for the footpaths,
disabled friendly structures and bicycle lanes at the fixed places in accordance with the
prevailing law.
(3) The Government of Nepal may, while operating the public transport, specify
the necessary standards and implement, or cause to be implemented, such standards in
order to make it environment friendly without adversely affecting the public health.
Industry and urbanization: (1) In order to prevent by identifying the adverse effect
likely to occur in the public health and to mitigate risk, public health impact assessment
shall be conducted in the industries, businesses and projects before obtaining approval.
(2) The standards, mechanism and level wise working area of the public health
impact assessment referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the Federal
(3) If adverse effect occurs in the public health as a result of failure to manage
waste properly by any industry, business and project or due to any kind of radiation,
the health treatment for the persons affected by this and in the case of the physical
damage, animal and livestock and other damage occurred, arrangement for its
appropriate compensation shall be made by the industrialist, businessperson and the
project concerned.
(4) The Federal, Provincial and Local Level shall make arrangement for the
promotion of public health friendly urbanization, having sufficient management for
sports, recreation spot, park, walking space, riding bicycle, in consideration of good
health.
(5) While determining the grant to be obtained by the Local Level under the
prevailing law, the Government of Nepal shall develop and include public health
friendly indicators.
Safety of health of workers working in risky zone: (1) For the safety of health of the
workers working in the risky zone, the concerned employer shall adopt safety measures
in accordance with the prevailing law.
(2) The employers shall procure health insurance of employees or staffs working
in risky zone pursuant to Sub-section (1) in accordance with the prevailing law.
(3) If any staff or employee is injured or dead due to the use of tool, equipment
or any other material at the risky workplace referred to in sub-section (1), or if any
health worker is seriously infected or falls ill in the course of providing service, the
concerned employer shall make arrangements for health treatment and appropriate
compensation.
(4) The health worker, staff or employee working at a risky workplace shall be
provided with the risk allowance by the concerned employer as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.
Advertisement, dissemination and transmission affecting public health: (1) No
advertisement of the production, distribution, dissemination and transmission of
advertising materials that adversely affect human health, including that of alcohol,
cigarette, tobacco or tobacco-based substances shall be made.
(2) Production, distribution, dissemination and transmission of advertisements
by keeping wrong or misleading information to attract towards any materials and
services that affect mental and physical health shall be prohibited.
Social, cultural superstitions affecting public health: The Federal, Provincial and
Local Level may adopt necessary measures for controlling social and cultural
superstitions that affect adversely in the public health.
Special social security and programs for target groups: (1) The Local Level and
Provincial Government shall make necessary arrangements to implement the programs
for special social health security for the women, children, adolescents, Dalits, martyrs'
families, and other targeted groups as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) Other provisions relating to health services, facilities to be provided for the
targeted groups pursuant to sub-section (1) and the process thereto shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-6
Emergency Health Service and Management
Emergency health service and management: (1) There shall be a rapid response team
and emergency physicians' group as prescribed in order to extend health service
immediately during emergency circumstances.
(2) The Federal, Provincial and Local Level shall develop emergency health
plan and enforce it.
(3) While developing the plan referred to in sub-section (2), the Federal,
Provincial and Local Level shall develop it in consonance with the standards and
directives determined by the Government of Nepal under the Federal law.
(4) The Local Level may declare a state of public health emergency in
accordance with the prevailing law.
Provided that, if any disaster occurs in more than one Local Level, the
concerned Province, and if the public health disaster occurs in more than one Province,
the Government of Nepal may declare state of public health emergency as prescribed.
(5) The information relating to the declaration of state of public health
emergency shall be disseminated and transmitted by public medium for all the
concerned.
(6) The period and zone of public health emergency including other aspects may
be added or reduced or removed on the basis of available data and information.
(7) Other provisions relating to the emergency state of health shall be as
prescribed.
Prevention, information and treatment of infectious disease: (1) The list of
infectious diseases shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) If highly hazardous infectious disease outbreaks at any place, it shall be the
duty of the concerned person to provide the health institution or public health official
with its information.
(3) If any person is found to have been affected with infectious disease,
management of his or her treatment shall be immediately made by the concerned health
institution or health worker.
(4) If patients are identified with the listed infectious diseases, the concerned
health institution or the health worker shall transmit the information to the concerned
body within the period as prescribed pursuant to the standards prescribed.
(5) The concerned Local Level shall have the responsibility for conducting
additional studies and management on time, on the basis of the information received
pursuant to sub-section (4), upon obtaining necessary support from the Province and
the Ministry, as prescribed.
(6) A health institution shall make necessary arrangements for the treatment of
the patient with infectious disease.
(7) Other provisions relating to the prevention of infectious diseases shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-7
National Public Health Committee
National Public Health Committee: (1) For addressing comprehensive social
determinants of health affecting human health, making policy-wise recommendation on
inclusion of the issues of public health into the policy and programs of thematic scope,
there shall be formed a National Public Health Committee.
(2) The formation of the Committee shall be as follows:
Minister, Ministry of the Government of Nepal
responsible for the matters relating to health
-Chairperson
State Minister/Assistant Minister, Ministry
of the Government of Nepal responsible for
the matters relating to health
-Member
Member, National Planning Commission
(responsible the matters relating to health)
-Member
One person nominated by the Government of
Nepal from among the Vice-chancellors of
Academies of Health and Sciences
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal looking after the matters relating to
industries
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to finance
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
agriculture
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal looking responsible for the matters relating to
drinking water and sanitation
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
home affairs
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
physical infrastructures and transport
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
women, children and elderly citizens
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
forest and environment
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
education
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
labor, employment and social security
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to health
-Member
Chief Specialist, Ministry of the Government
of Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to health
-Member
One Chairperson nominated from
among the Councils related to health
-Member
One person nominated by the Chairperson
from among health experts
-Member
Two persons including one woman nominated
by the Chairperson from among the directors of
private health institutions
-Member
One person nominated by the Chairperson from
among the office bearers of the organizations/
institutions related to the consumers' welfare
protection
-Member
Chief, Policy, Planning and Monitoring Division,
Ministry of the Government of Nepal responsible
for the matters relating to health and population -Member-Secretary
(3) The term of office of the members nominated pursuant to clauses (d), (q),
(r) (s) and (t) of sub-section (2) shall be three years.
(4) The committee may invite other experts to the meeting as necessary.
(5) The meeting of the committee shall be convened at least twice a year.
(6) The Policy, Planning and Monitoring Division of the Ministry of the
Government of Nepal responsible for the matters relating to health and population shall
carry out the work of Secretariat for performance of the day to day business of the
committee.
(7) The procedures of the committee shall be as determined by the committee
itself.
Functions, duties and powers of the committee: (1) The functions, duties and powers
of the committee shall be as follows:
To guide, monitor and make policy suitable to the concept of the multisector dimensions of health relating to safety, protection and
improvement of the health of citizen,
To adopt, or cause to be adopted, the health policy in all other policies
to address comprehensive social determinants of health,
To determine multi-sector and priority based goal on proportional
distribution in the service sector of health,
To manage effective coordination in the service provision of health,
To cooperate, coordinate and monitor to apply international policy,
strategy and commitment related to public health in the national interest
of Nepal,
To make recommendation to the Government of Nepal to control
pesticides being used for various purposes, and to make necessary policy
to mitigate road and vehicular accidents and prepare standards related to
business health,
To make necessary recommendation to make provisions for the public
health workers to promote the primary treatment and health education at
schools of the Local Level,
To perform such other functions as assigned by the Government of
Nepal,
(2) The committee may form sub-committees as necessary.

Chapter-8
Offences and Punishment
Offence: If any person commits any of the following acts, such a person shall be
deemed to have committed the offence under this Act:
To operate a health institution without obtaining the license pursuant to

Section 22, and to operate blood transmission service without obtaining
the license pursuant to Section 34.
To refuse to provide health treatment service,
To treat the persons having mental health problem by committing the
acts such as keeping them tied up or detaining in a cell,
To make refusal by a health institution to provide basic health service
and emergency treatment available at the health institution,
To provide treatment service without obtaining the informed consent
pursuant to Section 11,
Not to extend equal behavior to the service recipients in accordance with

Section 12,
Not to maintain confidentiality pursuant to Section 14,
To make obstruction and disturbance to prevent the health worker or
health institution from fulfilling the duty under this Act,
Not to provide an information by the concerned person to the health
worker or health institution of the notice or information pursuant to this
To provide health worker or service provider deliberately with the false
information,
To pretend being another person in order to deceive the health worker
or health institution,
Not to comply with this Act and the rules, standards, directives and
procedure made under this Act,
To have adverse impact in public health due to the quality of food, water
and air pursuant to Sections 39 and 40,
To make an advertisement contrary to Section 45,
To collect human biological sample and take it outside the country
without obtaining the approval in accordance with the prevailing law,
To do any other act contrary to this Act, and the Rules, standards,
directives and procedures made under this Act.
Punishment: Punishment shall be imposed as follows for the offence referred to in

Section 52:
If the offence referred to in clauses (a) and (o) is committed, a fine of
one million rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years
or both,
If the offence referred to in clauses (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k),
(l), (m) and (p) is committed, a fine from twenty-five thousand up to
fifty thousand rupees,
If the offence referred to in clause (c) is committed, fine up to fifty
thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or
both,
If the offence referred to in clause (n) is committed, a fine of ten
thousand rupees is to be imposed on the person who broadcasts the
advertisement.
Investigating authority: The authority to carry out investigation and inquiry of the
case deemed to be an offence under this Act shall be vested in the official designated
by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall be the plaintiff
of the cases under this Act.
Authority to adjudicate cases and hear appeals: (1) The District Court shall have the
power to originally adjudicate the case deemed to be an offence under this Act.
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the decision made by the District Court
pursuant to sub-section (1) may file an appeal in the High Court.
Compensation: (1) If the offence is held to have been committed under this Act, the
adjudicating authority shall make an order to get appropriate compensation paid from
the offender for the actual damage and loss caused to the affected party.
(2) Other provisions relating to the recovery of compensation shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-9
Miscellaneous
To obtain approval of Ministry: (1) Approval of the Ministry shall be obtained in
order to collect the human biological sample and before taking such sample outside the
country.
(2) The Ministry may, for the purpose of sub-section (1), make and apply
necessary standards and procedures.
To maintain records: It shall be the duty of the chief of the concerned health institution
to make arrangement to safely maintain the records of every service recipient, as
prescribed, who receives service from the health institution.
To submit report: (1) Each health institution shall submit the report to the body that
issues the license every year as prescribed, by including the details of the service
provided by it.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the concerned
Province and Local Levels shall forward the integrated report of the services provided
by the health institutions in operation upon obtaining the license from the Province and
Local Levels, on the basis of the report received from the health institutions pursuant
to sub-section (1) to the Ministry.
(3) While forwarding the report pursuant to sub-section (2), the details of the
programs relating to public health conducted by the Province and Local Levels, under
the prevailing the, shall also be included.
(4) The Ministry may issue directives as necessary on the basis of the report
received pursuant to sub-section (2).
To be in accordance with prevailing law: The matters contained in this Act shall be
governed by this Act and the matters not contained in this Act shall be in accordance
with the prevailing law.
Delegation of authority: The authorized official may delegate some of the powers
conferred to him or her pursuant to this Act to any official as per necessity.
Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in order
to implement this Act.
Power to make standards, directives or procedures: The Ministry may make
necessary standards, directives or procedures subject to this Act or the rules framed
under this Act.

===== SOURCE: The Right to Safe Motherhood and Reproductive Health Act (2075).pdf =====

The Right to Safe Motherhood and Reproductive
Health Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 9 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for the Right to Safe Motherhood
and Reproductive Health
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary provisions on making motherhood
and reproductive health service safe, qualitative, easily available and accessible, in order
to respect, protect and fulfill the right to safe motherhood and reproductive health of the
women conferred by the Constitution of Nepal,
Now, therefore be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Right to Safe
Motherhood and Reproductive Health Act, 2075 (2018)."
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act,-
"Emergency obstetric care" means the service available twenty-four
hours to manage any complications in case such complications
appear during the condition of pregnancy, child delivery or child
birth.
"Basic emergency obstetric care" means the basic service such as
administering antibiotic, magnesium sulfate or oxytocin, taking out
entangled placenta and fetus membrane, give birth to infant with the
help of vacuum and cleansing uterus in the case of occurrence of
miscarriage.
"Teenager" means a person who is of the age group of over ten years
up to nineteen years.
"Abortion" means the act of fetus coming out or taking it out of the
womb or before the fetus remained in the uterus born naturally.
"Contraception" means the measures to prevent pregnancy by
creating obstruction in the common process of ovulation, melting
over sperm and ovum or ovum implantation.
"Contraceptives" means hormone-based or other means to help in
the work of contraception.
"Abortion service" means the abortion service performed in a
licensed health institution, by the licensed health worker upon
fulfilling the process under this Act.
"Obstetric care" means the service referred to in Section 5.
"Pregnancy" means a period from the first day of the last
menstruation occurred prior to conception up to remaining of fetus
in the womb of a woman.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the rules framed under this Act.
"Newborn essential care" means the care including keeping the
newborn warm, caring of navel and eyes, breast feeding,
administering necessary vaccines.
"Newborn emergency care" means administering antibiotic,
managing including hypothermia for the newborn during the state
of infection, and managing the problems relating to respiration of
such a new born.
"Family planning" means the plan to determine number of children
or gap between pregnancies upon self interest by using or not using
the contraceptives.
"Reproductive health" means physical, mental and social health
condition related to reproductive system, process and function.
"Right to reproductive health" means the right referred to in Section
"Morbidity" means the state of adversely affecting reproductive
system due to reproduction, pregnancy, abortion, labor and sexual
behavior, and this term also includes uterus prolapse, travail cavity,
infertility, pelvic caner and similar other state of such types that
affects reproductive system.
"Midwife" means a trained health worker to help in child birth of
the pregnant woman.
"Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal looking
after the matters relating to health.
"Comprehensive
emergency
obstetric
care"
means
blood
transmission and surgery service, in addition to basic emergency
obstetric care mentioned in clause (b).
"Safe motherhood" means motherhood service to be provided to
women pursuant to this Act during the state of pregnancy, labor and
child birth.
"Health institution" means a hospital, nursing home, medical
college or health academy operated in governmental, nongovernmental, community or private level, and the term also
includes primary health center, health post or health institution
operated under any other name.

Chapter-2
Right to Reproductive Health
3. Right to reproductive health: (1) Every woman and teenager shall have the right to
obtain education, information, counseling and service relating to sexual and
reproductive health.
(2) Every person shall have the right to obtain service, counseling and
information relating to reproductive health.
(3) Every woman shall have the right to safe motherhood and reproductive
health. Every woman shall have the right to determine the gap between births or
the number of children.
(4) Every person shall have the right to get information regarding
contraceptives and use them.
(5) Every woman shall have the right to obtain abortion service pursuant to
this Act.
(6) Every woman shall have the right to nutritious, balanced diet and
physical rest during the condition of pregnancy and child birth and morbidity.
(7) Every woman shall have the right to get necessary counseling, obstetric
care, and postpartum contraceptive service.
(8) Every woman shall have the right to get emergency obstetric care, basic
emergency obstetric care, comprehensive emergency obstetric care, essential care
for the new born baby and emergency care of the new born baby.
(9) Every person shall have the right to get reproductive health service
needed during different situation of his/her lifecycle, in easily available,
acceptable and safe manner.
(10) Every person shall have the right to make a choice of reproductive
health service.
To remain confidential: The reproductive health service obtained by every
person and information regarding this shall remain confidential.

Chapter-3
Safe Motherhood and Newborn Baby
Right to get obstetric service: (1) Every woman shall have the right to get her
examined or checked whether she is pregnant or not, upon going to a health
institution.
(2) The health institution concerned shall have to provide the pregnant
woman, coming to get service pursuant to sub-section (1), with the services as
follows:
To check health at least four times during the pregnancy in normal
condition,
To check health as per the advice of a physician or competent health
worker during the prescribed condition except that referred to in
clause (a),
To receive appropriate counseling relating to health care,
To obtain safety measures and minimum care to be adopted during
pregnancy.
To provide obstetric care: (1) A governmental and community health institution
providing obstetric care shall have to arrange competent health worker to provide
obstetric care, or midwife or other trained health worker if such a competent health
worker is not available.
(2) The non-governmental and private health institution fulfilling the
standard prescribed by the Government of Nepal shall have to provide obstetric
care in a respectful manner.
Emergency obstetric and newborn care: (1) The governmental and community
health institutions providing obstetric care shall have to provide obstetric care in
a respectful manner.
(2) The non-governmental and private health institutions fulfilling the
standard prescribed by the Government of Nepal shall have to provide emergency
obstetric and newborn care.
(3) In case the health institutions referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) are
not able to manage the complications that arise while providing service by them,
they shall have to refer to a governmental or community health institution to the
extent possible and to a non-governmental and private institution if not possible.
(4) It shall be the duty of the health institution concerned to manage the
health complications of the conditions related to the pregnant, childbirth or
newborn who comes upon being referred pursuant to sub-section (3).
(5) The health institution providing emergency obstetric and newborn care
shall have to make provision of resting place as prescribed for the pregnant women
of the condition as prescribed.
Health care of newborn baby: The health institutions providing obstetric care
shall have to make provisions relating to health care of the newborn baby as per
the standard prescribed.
To maintain record of the births of infants: (1) Each health institution shall
have to maintain record of the infants born in that health institution.
(2) On the basis of the record referred to in sub-section (1), the health
institution shall have to provide the father or mother with the certificate of the
infant born in its health institution by stating the name of father or mother of the
infant.
(3) Each health institution shall have to maintain a record revealing the
number of the dead infants and the women who have undergone miscarriage or
abortion.
(4) Each health institution shall have to maintain a record of dead women,
if any, who come for the obstetric care.
Right to obtain family planning service: (1) Every person shall have the right
to information, make choice relating to family planning, and get other services
relating to family planning.
(2) The service relating to family planning as prescribed shall have to be
obtained from the health institution as prescribed.
(3) Other matters relating to family planning shall be as prescribed.
Not to get family planning performed forcefully: It is forbidden to get family
planning of any one performed forcefully by coercing, or threatening or enticing
or tempting or without obtaining written consent of such person.
Not to get contraceptives used forcefully: It is forbidden to get the
contraceptives used by coercing any one, or threatening or enticing or tempting or
without obtaining consent of such person.
Right to obstetric leave: (1) Any woman working in a governmental, nongovernmental or private organization or institution shall have the right to get
obstetric leave with pay, for a minimum of ninety-eight days before or after the
delivery.
(2) In case the obstetric leave referred to in sub-section (1) is not sufficient
to any pregnant woman, such a woman shall have the right to get leave without
pay, for a maximum of one year upon the recommendation of the expert doctor.
(3) A governmental, non-governmental or private organization or
institution shall have to make necessary arrangement for the woman working in
its office for breast feeding during the office hours up to two years from the birth
of the infant.
(4) Even if any pregnant woman gives birth to a dead infant or if the infant
dies after birth, such a woman shall enjoy the leave referred to in sub-section (1).
(5) If the wife of a male employee working in a governmental, nongovernmental or private organization or institution is going to deliver a baby, such
an employee shall get the obstetric care leave with remuneration for fifteen days
before or after delivering the baby.
To provide additional leave: If complicated surgery is to be conducted as per the
opinion of the specialist doctor due to morbidity, the governmental, nongovernmental or private organization or institution shall have to provide the
woman working in its office with an additional leave with pay for a maximum of
thirty days before or after conducting such surgery.

Chapter-4
Safe Abortion
To perform safe abortion: A pregnant woman shall have the right to get safe
abortion performed in any of the following circumstances:
Fetus (gestation) up to twelve weeks, with the consent of the
pregnant woman,
Fetus (gestation) up to twenty-eight weeks, as per the consent of
such woman, after the opinion of the licensed doctor that there may
be danger upon the life of the pregnant woman or her physical or
mental health may deteriorate or disabled infant may be born in case
the abortion is not performed,
Fetus (gestation) remained due to rape or incest, fetus (gestation) up
to twenty-eight weeks with the consent of the pregnant woman,
Fetus (gestation) up to twenty-eight weeks with the consent of the
woman who is suffering from H.I.V. or other incurable disease of
such nature,
Fetus (gestation) up to twenty eight weeks with the consent of the
woman, as per the opinion of the health worker involved in the
treatment that damage may occur in the womb due to defects
occurred in the fetus (gestation), or that there is such defect in the
fetus of the womb that it cannot live even after the birth, that there
is condition of disability in the fetus (gestation) due to genetic defect
or any other cause.
Not to get abortion conducted forcefully: (1) Except in the circumstance as
referred to in Section 15, no one shall conduct or get abortion conducted with an
intention to get the abortion conducted or knowingly or having reason to believe
that the abortion can occur.
(2) No one shall get the abortion conducted by coercing a pregnant woman,
threatening, enticing or tempting her.
(3) If any of the following acts is committed, it shall be deemed to have got
abortion performed:
Getting abortion conducted pursuant to sub-section (2),
Miscarriage that occurs while something is done to the pregnant
woman with some enmity,
Making assistance to commit acts referred to in clauses (a) and (b),
(4) While conducting abortion, in case the abortion does not occur instantly
but a living infant is born, and if the infant, which is born as a result of such an
act dies immediately, it shall be deemed to have got the abortion conducted for the
purposes of this Section.
Not to commit abortion upon identifying sex: (1) No one shall commit or cause
to be committed an act to identify the sex of the fetus in the womb.
(2) A pregnant woman shall not be pressurized or compelled or intimidated
or coerced or enticed or entrapped in undue influence to identify the sex of the
fetus.
(3) Conducting abortion or causing it to be conducted, by identifying the
sex pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), is prohibited.
Safe abortion service: (1) The licensed health worker who has fulfilled the
prescribed standards and qualification shall have to provide the pregnant woman
with safe abortion service pursuant to Section 15 in the licensed health institution.
(2) Appropriate technology and process of the service to be provided as
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
(3) The pregnant woman who wants to obtain the safe abortion service shall
have to give consent in the prescribed format to the health institution which has
obtained a license, or to the health worker who has obtained a license.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), in the case of a
woman who is an insane, who is not in a condition to give consent instantly or
who has not completed the age of eighteen years, her guardian or curator shall
have to give consent.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), in the case of a
woman who is below the age of eighteen years, safe abortion service shall have to
be provided by considering her best interests.
To maintain confidentiality: (1) The licensed health institution or licensed health
worker shall have to keep confidential all records, information, documents related
to reproductive health of the pregnant woman and counseling and service provided
to her.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the records
relating to such information, document and counseling service may be made
available on the following conditions:
If information is demanded by the investigation authority or court
in course of investigation and hearing of any lawsuit,
If it is required to quote without revealing identity of the related
woman for the purpose of study, research or monitoring relating to
safe abortion,
If the woman concerned demands herself the records thereof.

Chapter-5
Morbidity
Right to obtain morbidity care: (1) Every woman shall have the right to get her
examined, obtain counseling and receive treatment relating to morbidity by or in
the health institution.
(2) It shall be the duty of the concerned health institution or health worker
to provide information of the matters relating to the care to be followed on the
condition of morbidity and in the condition following the surgery, and the hazards
likely to be caused by it while providing service referred to in sub-section (1) in a
manner that such information is understandable.
Not to displace: No one shall divorce, expel from home or displace anyone or get
any one divorced, expelled or displaced by showing the reason of morbidity.

Chapter-6
Budget Appropriation and Grant for Motherhood and Reproductive Health
To appropriate grant amount: (1) The Government of Nepal shall have to
appropriate grant amount through its budget every year for every Local Level for
the purpose of motherhood and reproductive health service.
(2) The Provincial Government shall have to appropriate certain amount
through its budget as grant every year, as per the Provincial law, for the Local
Level for the purpose of motherhood and reproductive health service.
(3) The Local Level concerned shall have to spend the amount appropriated
as per sub-sections (1) and (2) for the motherhood and reproductive health of the
economically extremely destitute women as prescribed.
To appropriate budget by Local Level: (1) The Local Level shall have to
appropriate necessary budget from its annual budget for the purposes of
motherhood and reproductive health service.
(2) While appropriating budget as referred to in sub-section (1), it shall
have to be appropriated in such a way that governmental and community health
institutions providing motherhood and reproductive health service receive it.
Reproductive Health Coordination Committee: (1) In order to make necessary
suggestions to the Government of Nepal for preparing policies, plans and programs
relating to safe motherhood and reproductive health, there shall be one
Reproductive Health Coordination Committee as follows:
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Population
-Chairperson
Joint-secretary, Ministry of Women, Children
and Senior Citizens
-Member
Joint-Secretary, Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology
-Member
Director General, Department of Health Services
-Member
Representative, Nepal Medical Council
-Member
Representative, Nepal Nursing Council
-Member
Representative, Nepal Health Professional Council
-Member
Legal Officer, Ministry of Health and Population
-Member
Two representatives including one woman nominated
by the Ministry from among the professional
institutions/persons conducting studies and research
or extending service in the field of reproductive health
and right to reproduction
-Member
One representative of Nepal Health Volunteers
Association designated by the Ministry
-Member
Director, Family Welfare Division, Health Service Department
-Member-secretary
(2) The Coordination Committee may invite the expert engaged in the
sector of reproductive health and right to reproduction to the meeting as required.
(3) The procedures relating to the meeting of the Committee shall be as
determined by the Committee itself.

Chapter-7
Offence and Punishment
Offence deemed to have been committed: If one commits any of the following
acts, one shall be deemed to have been committed the offence under this Act:
To deprive one of receiving the obstetric care referred to in Section
Refusal to provide obstetric care by any health institution providing
obstetric care pursuant to Section 6,
Referral to other health institution deliberately even upon the
treatment being possible in his or her health institution, or,
Non-issuance of birth certificate by the health institution pursuant
to Section 9,
Forceful conduction of family planning as referred to in Section 11,
Making forceful use of contraceptive as referred to in Section 12,
Conduction of abortion as referred to in Section 16,
Commission of any act to identify sex of the fetus in contrary with
the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 17,
Causing abortion upon identifying sex as referred to in sub-section
(3) of Section 17,
Breaching, or causing to be breached of, confidentiality in
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 19,
Making or causing to be made displacement in contrary to the
provision of Section 21,
Making discrimination contrary to the provision of Section 29.
Punishment: If one commits, or causes to be committed, any act that is deemed
to be the offence as referred to in Section 25, one shall be liable to the following
punishment according the gravity of the offence:
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or fine not
exceeding fifty thousand rupees or both the penalties for committing
or getting committed the offence referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c),
(d) and (l),
Imprisonment for three months to six months and fine not exceeding
fifty thousand rupees for committing or getting committed the
offence referred to in clauses (e) and (f),
Punishment referred to in Section 188 of National Criminal Code,
2074 (2017) for committing or causing to be committed the offence
referred to in clauses (g), (h) and (i),
Fine not exceeding fifty thousand rupees for committing or causing
to be committed the offence as referred to in clause (j),
Imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year and fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or both the penalties for
committing or causing to be committed the offence referred to in
clause (k).
Provision of compensation: A person who is victimized from the offence under
this Act shall be provided with reasonable compensation by the perpetrator.

Chapter-8
Miscellaneous
To provide disability friendly service: While providing services including
family planning, reproductive health, safe motherhood, safe abortion, emergency
obstetric and newborn care, morbidity under this Act, such services shall have to
be adolescent and disability friendly.
Not to discriminate: No one shall discriminate on the right to get monthly
services including family planning, reproductive health, safe motherhood, safe
abortion, emergency obstetric and newborn care, morbidity on the ground of one’s
origin, religion, color, caste, ethnicity, sex, community, occupation, business,
sexual and gender identity, physical or health condition, disability, marital status,
pregnancy, ideology, state of being infected with or vulnerable to any disease or
germ, state of morbidity, personal relationship or any other similar ground.
Provision of protection home: For the protection of reproductive health of a
woman who is mentally disabled, neglected from the house, family or relatives or
raped, the Federal, Provincial and Local Levels shall have to make arrangement
with reciprocal coordination for keeping such a woman in a protection home.
To give directives: (1) The Ministry may give necessary directives to health
institutions to provide service of reproductive health.
(2) It shall be the duty of the concerned health institution to comply with
the directives received pursuant to sub-section (1).
Service charge: (1) The governmental health institution or health institution that
receives government grants shall have to provide free reproductive health service.
(2) Private, non-governmental and community health institutions may take
service charge as prescribed for providing reproductive health service.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), private, nongovernmental and community health institutions and health workers shall have to
make the service easily available, and provide free service (quota) as prescribed
for the person who is unable to pay the service charge.
Obstetric allowance: The Government of Nepal shall have to provide the
extremely destitute woman who delivers baby with obstetric allowance as
prescribed.
Saving of act done in good faith: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Act, no legal action shall be instituted against any health institution and
health worker for any matter of the reproductive health service provided in good
faith.
Authority to try cases: (1) The concerned District Court shall have the authority
to originally adjudicate the cases of the offence under this Act.
(2) A person who is not satisfied with the punishment or order made by the
District Court pursuant to sub-section (1) may make an appeal in the concerned
High Court.
Government of Nepal to become plaintiff: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
become the plaintiff in the cases referred to in Section 25.
(2) The cases referred to in Section 25 shall be deemed to have been
included in Schedule-1 of the National Criminal Procedure Code, 2074 (2017).
Limitation: No complaint shall lie after the expiry of six months from the date of
knowledge of the commission of any offence under this Act.
To be in accordance with prevailing law: The matters contained in this Act shall
be governed by this Act and the matters not contained in this Act shall be in
accordance with the prevailing law.
Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in
order to implement this Act.
To issue directives: The Ministry may frame and implement the necessary
directives subject to this Act and the rules framed under this Act.

===== SOURCE: The-Labour-Act-(2074).pdf =====

The Labour Act, 2017 (2074)
Date of Authentication:
4 September 2017 (19 Bhadra 2074)
Act number 14 of the year 2017 (2074)
An Act Made for the Amendment and Consolidation of the Laws Relating to
Labour
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the laws relating to labour in
order to provide for rights, interests and benefits of labours, develop good labour relations
by making explicit provisions on the rights and duties of labours and employers and
increase productivity by ending all forms of labour exploitation;
Now, therefore, the Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1) of Article 296
of the Constitution of Nepal has enacted this Act.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Labour Act,
2017 (2074)."
This Act shall commence forthwith.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act:
"Basic remuneration" means the basic remuneration to be received
by a labour for employment, and this term also include amount of
increment in remuneration after completion of one year of the
employment period.
"Chief Executive" means a person who bears the final responsibility
for the activities of the enterprise.
"Workplace" means the place or location where a labour works, and
this term also includes a place or situation where a labour has to stay
or visit in the course of the work.
"Office" means the Labour Office.
“Lockout" means the closure of any enterprise or workplace by the
employer to prevent fully or partly the labours from performing their
regular work.
Provided that this term does not refer to a situation where the
labours are held in reserve or where the work is stopped because of
the occurrence of an immediate danger.
“Prescribed” or “as prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed
in the rules framed under this Act, and this term also includes a
notice published in the Nepal Gazette as provided for in this Act or
the rules framed under this Act.
"Inspector" means the senior labour inspector, labour inspector,
senior occupational safety and health inspector and occupational
safety and health inspector, and this term also includes any other
employee deputed for inspection.
"Council" means the Central Labour Advisory Council formed
pursuant to Section 102.
"Remuneration" means the basic remuneration to which a labour is
entitled, and this term also includes an allowance.
"Enterprise" means any company, private firm, partnership firm,
cooperative organization or association or other organization which
is established, incorporated, registered or formed or operated in
accordance with the prevailing law with the objective to carry on
any industry, business or service, with or without profit motive.
"Ministry" means the Ministry of Labour and Employment,
Government of Nepal.
"Main employer" means an employer who employs labours through
a labour provider.
"Employer" means any person or enterprise that employs labours,
and this term also includes a manager in the case of an enterprise,
and a labour provider in the case of a labour supplied pursuant to
this Act.
"Employment contract" means an agreement entered into between
an employer and a labour in relation to the service, conditions and
benefits of employment, and this term also includes the letter of
appointment given by the employer to the labour.
"Employment period" means the period during which a labour is
employed with an employer, and this term also includes the
following period:
Period held in the reserve,
Period of leave with remuneration,
Period of unpaid leave taken for maternity or
maternity care,
Period of leave taken for medical treatment in case of
accident during or while working for the employer.
"By-law" means the by-law relating to conditions of service of the
labours framed by an enterprise pursuant to Section 108, and this
term also includes the financial administration by-law of the
enterprise.
"Department" means the Department of Labour.
"Manager" means the chief executive of an enterprise. and this term
also includes the chief of any section or unit so appointed as taking
or exercising the final responsibility or authority.
"Managerial level labour" means a labour appointed to a post at the
managerial or higher level thereof entrusting the authority to
evaluate, control and supervise the work of labours on behalf of the
employer, and this term also includes the manager.
"Social Security Fund" means the Social Security Fund established
pursuant to the prevailing law.
"Collective agreement" means an agreement entered into between
the employer or employers' association and the trade union or
Collective Bargaining Committee on remuneration, conditions of
service, benefits of the labours or matters of common concern to the
employer and the labours.
"Collective
Bargaining
Committee"
means
Collective
Bargaining Committee referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 116.
"Labour Court" means the Labour Court formed pursuant to Section
"Labour" means a worker or employee or a person employed with
any job title who performs a physical or intellectual work for the
employer.
"Labour supplier" means a person or body having obtained the
license pursuant to Chapter 11 to supply labours.
"Strike" means a situation where labours collectively refuse to
perform their regular work partially or completely.
Provided that a situation where labours are on leave or
stopped the work as a result of the occurrence of an immediate
danger or have become unable to attend or perform the work due to
a situation beyond the control of labours shall not be considered as
a strike.

Chapter-2
Basic Provisions Relating to Labours
To remain as minimum standards: (1) This Act shall remain as minimum
standards for labours and on matters relating to labours.
Where an employment contract is entered into between an employer
and a labour with provisions to pay or receive remuneration or benefits lesser than
the remuneration or benefits set forth in this Act and the rules framed under this
Act or in contravention of the conditions set forth in this Act, such an employment
contract shall be deemed to be contrary to this Act, and it shall, to that extent, be
void.
Prohibition on employing in forced labour: (1) No person shall employ any
labour in forced labour, directly or indirectly.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
following work or service performed by a labour shall not be deemed to be forced
labour:
Any work or service required to be performed under the duties of
citizens as and when the nation so requires,
Any work or service required to be performed by any person in
consideration for the sentence imposed by a decision or order of a
court,
Any work or service required to be performed as a member of a
community for the interest of such a community.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "forced labour" means any
work or service performed by any labour against his or her will as a result of a
threat of taking any action having financial, physical or mental impact if he or she
does not perform such a work or service.
Prohibition on employment of children: No person shall so employ a child in
any work as to be contrary to law.
Prohibition on discrimination: (1) No employer shall discriminate any labour on
the ground of religion, colour, sex, caste, tribe, origin, language, ideological
conviction or other similar ground.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
following act shall not be considered as discrimination:
To give preference to any person for employment on the basis of
inherent requirement of a work or service,
To engage a female labour who is pregnant in any work or service
which is easier and suitable to her physical condition, without any
reduction in the remuneration and benefits, or
To give preference to a labour with physical disability for such job
responsibility as is suitable to his or her physical condition.
Prohibition on discrimination in remuneration for equal work: (1) No
discrimination shall be made between the labours in remuneration for equal value
of work on the ground of sex.
For the purpose of sub-section (1), whether the work is of equal
value shall be determined on the basis of the nature of the concerned work, the
time required for its performance, labour, skill and productivity.
Right relating to trade union: (1) Every labour shall, subject to this Act and other
laws, have a right to form and operate a trade union, acquire the membership of,
or get affiliated with, such union or involve in other activities relating to trade
union.
While exercising the right relating to labour pursuant to this Act and
other laws, the labour shall be dutiful and responsible towards the employer.
Right to remedy: In the event of infringement of any right conferred by this Act
and other law to a labour, such a labour can get remedy pursuant to this Act or
other law.

Chapter3
Provisions Relating to Employment
Types of employment: (1) An employer may engage a labour in any type of the
following employment:
Regular employment,
Work-based employment,
Time-based employment,
Casual employment,
Part-time employment.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, -
“Regular employment” means employment of any type whatever
other than that set forth in clauses (b), (c) and (d).
“Work-based employment” means employment that the employer
provides or has provided specifying any particular work or service
for performance.
“Time-based employment” means employment that the employer
provides or has provided to the labour specifying a certain period on
the condition that the labour has to provide any service or perform
any work within that period.
“Casual employment” means employment that the employer
provides or has provided to the labour on the condition that the
labour has to provide any service or perform any work, for seven
days or less within a period of one month.
"Part-time employment" means employment that the employer
provides or has provided to the labour on the condition that the
labour has to perform a work in thirty-five hours or less than thirtyfive hours in a week.
If there arises a question as to whether any employment is regular
or not, it shall be determined as prescribed on the basis of the nature of the work,
notwithstanding anything contained in the employment contract.
Prohibition on employment without entering into employment contract: (1)
No employer shall employ a person without entering into an employment contract.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall not
be necessary to enter into an employment contract in writing for a casual
employment.
While entering into an employment contract pursuant to sub-section
(1), remuneration, benefits to be received by the labour, conditions of employment
and other matters as prescribed shall be set out in such a contract.
Employment relationship to be established: (1) Where the employer enters into
an employment contract with a labour or employs a labour verbally or engages a
worker on casual employment, the employment relationship between the employer
and the employee shall be established, or in the case of the casual employment,
such relation is established from the date or time when the labour is employed or
he or she provides the service.
Where there arises a dispute as to whether the employment
relationship has existed between an employer and a labour, such a dispute shall be
settled by the Office.
Where the dispute referred to in sub-section (2) is also included in
any issue that is sub judice in the Department or a Court, such a dispute shall also
be settled by the Department or Court.
For the purpose of sub-section (2), the Office may give an order to
the employer to submit any evidence or document relating to the employment
which remains in his or her custody, and if the employer does not submit such
evidence or document in pursuance of the order, the employment relationship
between the employer and the labour shall be deemed to have been established.
Provision relating to probation period: In entering into an employment contract
with a labour, the employer may so enter into the contract that he or she remains
in a probation period for six months, and terminate the employment contract with
the labour if his or her work is not satisfactory during the probation period. After
the end of the probation period of a labour in respect of whom the employment
contract has not been so terminated, the employment relation shall ipso facto be
deemed to be valid.
Continuity of existence of the employment relationship despite change in
ownership: (1) In the case of a change in or transfer of ownership of any work or
business or any part thereof of any employer or hand over of such a work or
business to another person for its operation or creation of a new enterprise or
business as a result of the merger of two or more enterprises or businesses, the
employment relationship of the labour working in such an enterprise or business
the ownership of which has been so changed or transferred or which has been so
handed over to the other person for its operation or in the enterprise or business
which has been merged shall continue to exist.
For the purpose of sub-section (1), the employer who so undertakes
the ownership or acquires the ownership by way of transfer or undertakes
responsibility to operate the work or business or, in the case of a merger of
businesses or enterprises, the new enterprise or business created from such merger
or, in the case of the transfer of the ownership and liability of a project in
accordance with the prevailing law relating to private investment in the building
and operation of infrastructures, the enterprise undertaking such ownership and
liability shall bear the liability under this Act or the rules framed under this Act or
the collective agreement, if any, entered into.
Provided that if any agreement on interim management has been made
between the previous employer, new employer and union of the concerned
enterprise, the provisions of the agreement shall apply.
Continuity of existence of employment relationship during the period held in
reserve: (1) If any special circumstance arises in the workplace, the employer may
suspend the work and hold the worker in reserve.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "special circumstance"
means a situation involving the shortage of electricity, water, raw materials or lack
of financial resources or inability to reach the workplace or work or operate the
workplace because of the occurrence of any situation beyond control.
Where any labour is held in reserve pursuant to sub-section (1), the
employment relationship between such an employer and worker shall continue to
exist.
Any employer employing ten or more labours may hold the labour
in reserve for a period not exceeding fifteen days, pursuant to sub-section (1).
Provided that if it is necessary to hold in reserve for more than the said period, the
employer shall consult with the authorised trade union or labour relation
committee.
Other provisions relating to holding the labour in reserve shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Trainees and Apprentices
Trainees may be engaged in work: (1) Any enterprise may, by making an
agreement with any educational institute, employ any person as an apprentice in
accordance with the approved curriculum of such an institute.
The apprentice referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be deemed to
be a labour for the purpose of this Act.
Provided that if the person is employed contrary to the approved
curriculum, he or she shall be deemed to be a labour in the regular employment.
Provisions relating to labour to be applicable: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 16, in employing an apprentice pursuant to this Chapter, he
or she shall not be engaged in work for more than eight hours a day and forty-eight
hours a week.
The provisions relating to occupational health and safety shall apply
to the apprentices as if they were labours.
Where an apprentice meets with an accident in the course of
performing the work of the enterprise, the enterprise shall, unless otherwise agreed
between the enterprise and the educational institute, have medical treatment of
such an apprentice, and provide compensation to him or her if he or she suffers
grievous hurt, as if he or she were a labour.
The matters other than those set forth in sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)
shall be as mentioned in the agreement between the enterprise and the educational
institute.
Engagement in work as trainee labour: (1) An employer may employ any person
as a trainee providing on the job training.
The period of training referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be more
than one year.
Provided that any period is specified by the prevailing law for a specific
work or specific training period is required for it, a trainee may accordingly be
employed for that period.
The employer shall provide the person employed a trainee pursuant
to this Section with at least such facilities as may not be less than the minimum
remuneration and other social security benefits including the sick leave, gratuity,
provident fund and insurance.
The employer shall not be compelled to continue the employment of
the trainee after the completion of the training period.
Provided that if the same employer engages the trainee in work, the
probation period shall not apply to him or her.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Part-Time Labours
Part-time employment: (1) An employer may employ a labour for part time.
Provided that a worker who works full time shall not be employed in parttime work without his or her consent.
The remuneration of part time labours shall be fixed generally on
the basis of working time (hours) or on the basis of the employment contract
entered into between the two parties.
While fixing the remuneration of the part time labours pursuant to
sub-section (2), such remuneration shall be fixed on the basis of at least the
monthly remuneration of the labours working full time at the same level for the
work of same nature.
Where a labour employed part-time pursuant to this Section is
employed in the overtime work, such a labour shall be provided with a
remuneration that is 1.5 times of the remuneration to which he or she is entitled
under sub-section (2).
Not to restrain from working elsewhere: No part time labour shall be restrained
from working elsewhere.
Provisions relating to social security: In the case of a part-time labour who works
for more than one employer, each employer shall, on the basis of the basic
remuneration to which the labour is entitled, make contribution for gratuity,
provident fund or other social security related benefits.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Work Permit
Restriction on employment of foreigners: (1) No employer shall employ any
foreign citizen as a labour without obtaining the work permit from the Department.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
employer may, if the skilled labour that it needs cannot be supplied from among
Nepali citizens, employ a foreign labour subject to this Section.
Prior to employing a foreign labour pursuant to sub-section (2), the
employer shall publish an advertisement in a national daily newspaper in order to
acquire the required skilled labour from among the Nepali citizens. If, in spite of
such an advertisement, no application is received from any Nepali citizen as
prescribed or any Nepali citizen cannot be selected, the employer may make an
application, accompanied by the evidence thereof, to the Department for the work
permit for employing a foreign labour.
The Department may, if it deems reasonable upon inquiring into the
application received under sub-section (3) and the evidence attached therewith,
issue a work permit for the employment of a foreign skilled labour.
Any employer who employs a foreign labour by obtaining the work
permit pursuant to sub-section (4) shall make arrangement for making Nepali
citizens skilled and gradual replacement of foreign labours.
The fees and other provisions relating to the work permit shall be as
prescribed.
Foreign citizen to obtain work permit to work in Nepal: (1) A foreign labour
shall obtain the work permit as prescribed in order to work in Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, any
foreign citizen who work in Nepal shall, except where he or she is entitled to
diplomatic immunity or is not required to obtain a work permit under any treaty
or agreement concluded with the Government of Nepal, obtain a work permit as
prescribed.
Work permit may be issued: Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 22
and 23, the Department may, upon maintaining the records, issue the work permit
to foreign nationals in the following circumstance:
The chief executive of an enterprise with foreign investment or
operated with foreign assistance and such number of labours as
prescribed to work in that enterprise,
Any technician who comes to repair or maintain any machinery
object or install any new technology or to do similar other unforeseen work for a
period of three months or less than three months.
Language of the contract: While entering into the employment contract with a
foreign labour and providing information relating to the work to be performed by
him or her, conditions of his or her service and benefits, the employer shall enter
into, or cause to be entered into, such a contract or provide such information in
such a language that he or she understands or in the English language.
Remuneration may be repatriated in convertible foreign currency: Any
foreign labour who has obtained the work permit pursuant to this Chapter shall be
allowed to repatriate to his or her country the amount of remuneration earned by
working in Nepal in a convertible foreign currency.
Remuneration, conditions of service, benefits of and other provisions relating
to foreign labours: (1) The remuneration to which a foreign labour is entitled for
the work performed, conditions of service and benefits of him or her shall be so
mentioned in the time-based or task-based employment contract entered into
between the employer and the labour as not being less favourable than the
standards set by this Act or the rules framed under this Act.
The employment contract shall remain valid for such a period as
mentioned in that contract, and failing such a provision, for a period not exceeding
three years.
Other provisions relating to foreign labours shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Working Hours
Working hours: (1) No employer shall employ labours to work more than eight
hours a day and forty-eight hours a week.
The labours shall be provided with half an hour rest after five
hours of continuous work.
In the cases of work which is not to be stopped and is to be carried
out continuously, labours shall be provided with such a rest time turn by turn.
The rest time to be provided pursuant to sub-sections (2) and (3)
shall be counted in the working hours referred to in sub-section (1).
Not to compel to work overtime: (1) No employer shall compel a labour to work
more than the hours set forth in sub-section (1) of Section 28.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the nonperformance of a work is likely to cause an adverse effect on the life, safety and
health of any person or a serious loss or damage to the employer, the concerned
labour may, subject to sub-section (1) of Section 30, be caused to work overtime.
Provisions relating to overtime: (1) Where an employer needs to cause any
labour to work for more than the working hours specified subject to Section 28,
such a labour may be caused to work not exceeding four hours a day and twentyfour hours a week.
The work which any labour has been caused by the employer to
perform without giving the substitute leave pursuant to Section 42 shall be deemed
to be an overtime work.
Additional remuneration to be paid: (1) While employing any labour to work
overtime pursuant to Section 30, the employer shall pay to the labour remuneration
at a rate of 1.5 times of the basic remuneration receivable during regular hours of
work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing
contained in this Section shall bar the collective agreement to provide for certain
benefits or the providing of such benefits as mentioned in the employment contract
in the case of the labour of managerial level, in lieu of the additional remuneration
receivable for an overtime work.
Fixation of working hours: (1) Where an employment contract specifies the
starting and finishing time of working hours for workers, it shall be followed
accordingly or in its absence, it shall be as determined by the employer.
Other provisions relating to working hours shall be as prescribed.
Arrangement for transportation to be made: In employing a female labour
where the working hours begin after the sunset or before the sun rise, the employer
shall make necessary arrangement for transportation to and from the workplace.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Remuneration
Entitlement of labours to remuneration: (1) Each worker shall be entitled to
receive the remuneration and benefits from the date on which he or she starts the
work.
The remuneration and benefits which a labour is entitled to shall be
so specified in the employment contract as not to be less than that specified in this
Act and the rules framed under this Act.
Except as mentioned in the collective agreement between the
employer and the labour, the remuneration and benefits being received and
enjoyed by the labour shall not be decreased.
Payment of remuneration: (1) In paying the remuneration to the labour, the
employer shall make such payment in accordance with the provision, if any,
mentioned in the employment contract to that effect, and failing such a provision,
at such a time as determined by the employer.
Provided that the remuneration shall be paid as follows to the following
labour:
In the case of a labour working for a period of less than one month,
within three days from the date of completion of the work.
In the case of a labour employed in a casual work, immediately after
the completion of the work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the interval
between the dates for payment of remuneration shall not be more than one month.
Entitlement to annual increment in remuneration (grade): Any labour who has
completed one year of service period shall be entitled to an annual increment in
remuneration (grade) each year in an amount equal to at least half a day
remuneration based on the monthly basic remuneration to which the labour is
entitled.
Entitlement to festival expense: (1) Each labour shall be entitled to an amount
equal to the basic remuneration of one month as the festival expense each year for
the festival to be celebrated according to his or her religion, culture and tradition.
A labour may make a written request to the employer for the
payment of the festival expense referred to in sub-section (1) at one time in one
fiscal year on the occasion of the main festival to be celebrated according to his
or her religion, culture and tradition. In the case absent such a request, the festival
expense shall be provided at the time of Dashain festival every year.
A labour who has not completed one year of service period on or
before the day of payment of the festival expense shall be entitled to such expense
in proportion to the period of service he or she has completed.
Prohibition on deduction of remuneration: (1) Except in the following
circumstance, no amount shall be deducted from the remuneration receivable by
the labour:
Any tax, fees leviable under law,
Any amount of contribution required to be made for provident fund
or insurance or any other social security,
Any amount required to be deducted pursuant to the order or
decision by any judicial or quasi-judicial body or arbitration,
Such amount as prescribed for such service or facility provided by
the employer to the labour as prescribed,
Amount of remuneration for the period during which the labour
remains absent from the work,
In the event of loss of or damage to cash or in-kind of the employer
with ulterior motive or recklessly, such amount as mentioned in the
cash or in-kind book or the amount equivalent to the production cost
in the case of a manufactured good,
Such amount as specified in the collective agreement to be
deductible from remuneration,
Membership fee chargeable by the trade union,
Amount of loan or advance provided or paid to the labour by the
employer.
While deducting the amount pursuant to sub-section (c), (d), (e), (f),
(g), (h) or (i), it shall be deducted from the monthly remuneration that remains
after deducting the amounts set forth in sub-sections (a) and (b).
The limit of, procedure and other provisions relating to the amount
deductible under sub-section (2) shall be as prescribed.
Where a labour dies or is relieved of service for any reason
whatsoever before the amount deductible pursuant to this Section is deducted, such
an amount may be deducted from any amount whatsoever payable to such a labour.
Where the amount to be deducted cannot be recovered even after
making deductions pursuant to sub-section (4) and the labour has died, the
employer shall give a notice of fifteen days to his or her heir under the law for the
payment of such an amount.
Where the amount is not paid even within the period referred to in
sub-section (5), the employer may make a petition to the court for the recovery of
such an amount within thirty-five days of the expiry of the period.
Remuneration for reserve period: Where a labour is held in reserve pursuant to
this Act, the employer shall pay half the remuneration which he or she is entitled
to until the work is resumed.
Provided that such a labour shall not be required to make attendance in the
workplace during the reserve period unless the requirement of attendance is
mentioned in the notice on holding the labour in reserve.

Chapter9
Provisions Relating to Leave
Weekly leave: A labour shall get the weekly leave of one day in each month.
Public leave: (1) Each labour shall each year get a paid public leave of thirteen
days including the May Day, and fourteen days including International Women
Labour Day in the case of a female labour.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the public
holidays in the case of an enterprise shall be as determined by the regulatory
authority, if any, that regulates such an enterprise and as determined by the
employer in the other situations.
Substitute leave: (1) A labour who is involved in a work that must not be stopped
or must be done continuously shall get the substitute leave in consideration for
having worked on any day of weekly or public leave.
Any labour who has been engaged in work on a day of weekly or
public leave shall be provided with the substitute leave within twenty-one days of
the date of engagement in work.
Home leave: (1) Every labour shall get paid home leave at the rate of one day for
twenty days of the period he or she has worked.
A labour who is employed in an educational institution or who gets
summer or winter leave shall not get home leave.
Provided that where such leave is lesser than the period of home leave, the
labour shall get home leave for such number of days as is so lesser.
Sick leave: (1) A labour shall get paid sick leave of twelve days a year.
Provided that a labour who work for a period of one year or lesser than one
year shall get the sick leave proportionately.
A labour who seeks the sick leave for more than three consecutive
days shall submit a certificate on his or her medical check-up by a recognized
doctor.
Where a labour has to take leave because of sudden illness, the
labour shall inform the employer or the person specified by the employer through
the fastest means to the extent available.
Maternity leave: (1) A pregnant female labour shall get a maternity leave of a
total of fourteen weeks before or after delivery.
A pregnant labour shall compulsorily take leave from at least two
weeks before the expected date of delivery to at least six weeks after the date of
delivery.
A female labour who takes the maternity leave referred to in subsection (1) shall get full remuneration for sixty days and shall not get remuneration
for the remaining period.
Where a recognized medical doctor recommends that the female
labour who has delivered a baby needs further rest for her or her baby’s health, the
employer shall approve unpaid leave of up to one month in addition to the period
referred to in sub-section (1) or sanction such leave to be adjusted with other leave,
in continuity with the maternity leave.
Where a female labour in a state of seven months’ pregnancy or
more than seven months gives birth to a deceased child or suffers miscarriage, she
shall get leave as if she made normal delivery.
Where the mother dies before the completion of sixty days of the
birth of her child, the labour whose wife has so died may take paid leave for the
remaining period for the care of the child from the employer for whom he is
working.
If a male labour’s wife is going to deliver a baby, he shall get paid
maternity care leave for a period of fifteen days.
Birth registration certificate to be submitted: Except where a newly born child
dies, a female worker who is on maternity leave shall submit a copy of such birth
registration certificate as prescribed to the employer.
Remuneration need not be paid: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Chapter, where a provision is made that a female labour is to receive
remuneration for the period of maternity leave from the Social Security Fund, the
employer shall not be required to pay, to that extent, the remuneration referred to
in this Chapter to the labour for such a period of leave.
Mourning leave: (1) Where a labour himself or herself has to mourn according to
his or her religion or because her husband or his wife dies or a married female
worker has to mourn on the death of her father or mother or father-in-law or
mother-in-law, such a labour shall get a mourning leave of thirteen days.
The labour who goes on the mourning leave referred to in subsection (1) shall get full remuneration.
Accumulation of leave: (1) A labour is entitled to accumulate the home leave and
the sick leave for up to ninety days and forty-five days, respectively.
Where a labour is relieved of the service for any reason or dies, he
or she or such family member of him or her as prescribed shall get the lump sum
amount to be set by the last basic remuneration being drawn by him or her for his
or her accumulated home leave and sick leave.
A labour whose accumulated leave exceeds the period specified in
sub-section (1) shall, at the end of each year, get the amount to be set by his or her
basic remuneration for the leave of such excess period.
Computation of year: A year shall, for the purpose of leave, be computed on the
following basis:
Where it is determined by law, it shall be in accordance with such
Where it is determined by the regulatory body, it shall be in
accordance with such provision,
Where it is not determined pursuant to clause (a) or (b), it shall be
as set out in the employment contract,
Where it is not determined as set forth in clauses (a), (b) and (c), it
shall be in accordance with the financial year of the Government of
Nepal.
Leave not as a matter of right: (1) All leaves except the sick leave, mourning
leave and maternity leave which the labour is entitled to pursuant to this Chapter
are only facility and cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
In the case of leaves other than that mentioned in sub-section (1),
the employer may, for the reason to be specified, refuse, withhold, deduct or alter
the time of the approved leave, on the basis of the need of the work at the
workplace.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Provident Fund, Gratuity and Insurance
Contribution for provident fund: (1) The employer shall deduct ten percent of
the basic remuneration of each labour, add cent percent to that amount and deposit
the total amount for the purpose of provident fund.
The employer shall deposit the amount referred to in sub-section (1)
in the Social Security Fund in the name of the concerned labour, with effect from
the date on which he or she started to work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-section (2), the
employer shall, in the following circumstance, deposit such provident fund amount
as prescribed:
Until the Social Security Fund is established and comes into
operation, or
Until the law relating to the Social Security Fund becomes
applicable to the concerned employer.
In the case of a labour for whom the amount for provident fund was
not contributed before the commencement of this Act, the employer shall
contribute the amount for provident fund from the date of the commencement of
this Act.
The amount for the provident fund deposited in the retirement fund
or any other similar fund established under the laws in force at the time of the
commencement of this Act or held in the custody of the employer shall be
transferred to the Social Security Fund as prescribed after the commencement of
this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
employer shall make payment of an additional amount equivalent to ten percent of
the basic remuneration of such a labour if the amount for the provident fund cannot
be deposited pursuant to Section (2) or (3) for any reason.
To receive gratuity: (1) The employer shall deduct an amount equivalent to eight
point three and three (8.33) percent of the basic remuneration of each labour each
month and deposit it for the purpose of gratuity.
The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deposited in the
Social Security Fund in the name of the concerned labour with effect from the date
on which such a labour begins to work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the
employer shall, in the following circumstance, deposit such amount of gratuity as
prescribed:
Until the Social Security Fund is established and comes into
operation, or
Until the law relating to the Social Security Fund is applicable to
the concerned employer.
The employer shall provide the gratuity referred to in sub-section
(1) from the date of the commencement of this Act in the case of a labour whom
the gratuity is not required to be paid to before the commencement of this Act.
The amount for gratuity deposited in the retirement fund or any
other similar fund established under the laws in force at the time of the
commencement of this Act or held in the custody of the employer shall be
transferred to the Social Security Fund as prescribed after the commencement of
this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
employer shall pay to a labour an additional amount equivalent to eight point three
and three (8.33) percent of the basic remuneration of such a labour if the amount
for gratuity cannot be deposited for any reason pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3).
Any labour who is entitled to pension shall not get the gratuity
referred to in this Act.
Medical insurance to be made: (1) The employer shall procure make an annual
medical insurance of at least one hundred thousand rupees for each labour.
The premium required for the medical insurance referred to in subsection (1) shall be borne by both the employer and the labour on pro rata basis.
Accidental insurance to be made: (1) The employer shall procure accidental
insurance of at least seven hundred thousand rupees covering all kinds of accidents
for each labour.
The whole premium required for the accidental insurance referred
to in sub-section (1) shall be borne by the employer.
If a labour dies or gets completely incapacitated mentally or
physically as a result of an accident, such a labour or his or her legal heir under
the prevailing law shall get for compensation the cent percent of the amount of
insurance referred to in sub-section (1).
If a labour gets injured or incapacitated in an accident, he or she
shall get compensation on the basis of the percentage of incapacitation as
prescribed.
Amount to be paid by the employer: Where a labour or his or her dependent heir
is not able to obtain the amount of insurance because of the failure of the employer
to procure insurance referred to in this Chapter or any recklessness or error made
in the making of insurance, the employer shall pay an amount equivalent to the
insurance to such a labour or dependent heir. \
Social security scheme to be applicable: Any employer or labour who so makes
contribution in the social security scheme as to be entitled to the benefits including
the provident fund, gratuity and medical insurance pursuant to the law relating to
the Social Security Fund shall not be required to make additional contribution or
insurance under this Chapter, to the extent of such contribution.

Chapter11
Provisions Relating to Supply of Labours
Labours may be employed through supplier: (1) The Ministry shall, on
recommendation of the Council, publish a list of works in which labours may be
employed through labour suppliers, by publishing a notification in the Nepal
Gazette.
While employing a labour through a labour supplier pursuant to subsection (1), the employer shall employ him or her in any work other than the core
work of the business or service.
While inviting or submitting any kind of proposal or tender for the
purpose of supplying or causing to supply a labour through a labour supplier or
entering into an agreement for the supply of labour, such proposal or tender or
agreement shall be invited or submitted or entered into so that the remuneration
and other benefits of the labour to be supplied shall not be less than that specified
in this Act.
Any proposal or tender invited or submitted or agreement entered
into contrary to sub-section (3) shall ipso facto be invalid.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "core work" means the work
mentioned while establishing the business and work directly related thereto.
License to be obtained: (1) A company that wishes to supply labours shall obtain
a license pursuant to this Act.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "company" means any
company incorporated in accordance with law.
A company that wishes to obtain a license shall make an application
in the prescribed format, accompanied by such fees, details and documents as
prescribed, to the Office of the concerned area.
Provided that a company that wishes to supply labours in an area with more
than one Offices shall make an application in the prescribed format, accompanied
by such fees, details and documents as prescribed, to the Department in order to
obtain the license.
If the content of an application received pursuant to sub-section (2)
seems to be reasonable upon its examination, the Department or Office shall, by
taking such a deposit or bank guarantee as prescribed, issue the license to such an
applicant on such conditions and in such a format as prescribed not later than
fifteen days.
While issuing a license pursuant to sub-section (3), the work or
service and scope of work relating to the supply of labours shall be mentioned in
such a license.
Provided that the same company shall not be allowed to supply labours for
more than two works or services.
Any organization or person carrying out labour supply related
business at the time of commencement of this Act shall, not later than six months
from the date of commencement of this Act, incorporate a company carrying out
the business of supplying labours in accordance with the prevailing company law
and obtain the license pursuant to this Section.
Submission of details by licensee: A licensee who has obtained a license from
the Office shall submit to the Office, and a licensee who has obtained a license
from the Department shall submit to the Department, such details as prescribed
before the last day of the month of Poush (mid January) each year.
Obligations of labour supplier: (1) The labour supplier shall not perform acts
and actions contrary to the conditions or directions as prescribed under this Act or
the rules framed under this Act.
The labour supplier shall, in the capacity of the employer referred
to in this Act, provide such remuneration and other benefits regularly to the labour
it supplies as may not be less than that determined under this Act.
The labour supplier shall regularly obtain information as to whether
or not the main employer has taken or made such measures and provisions or
arrangements as required to be taken or made in the workplace for occupational
safety and health of the labour, and recommend for making such arrangements
immediately if it is found that such arrangements have not been made.
Where it is found that the main employer has not implemented the
recommendation referred to in sub-section (3), the labour supplier shall give
information thereof to the Department or concerned Office.
Revocation, suspension of license or fine: (1) The Department or Office issuing
the license may revoke the licence of a labour supplier in the following
circumstance:
If the labour supplier makes an application in writing for the
revocation of his or her license, or
If, in spite of the fine imposed pursuant to sub-section (6), the labour
supplier continues to violate the conditions specified or directions
issued pursuant to this Act or the rules framed under this Act.
Prior to the revocation of a license pursuant to clause (b) of subsection (1), the concerned labour supplier shall be provided with an opportunity
of at least seven days to furnish his or her explanation.
A notice on the decision made to revoke the license pursuant to this
Section shall be published publicly.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, if it
appears that the labour supplier whose license has been revoked has any financial
liability towards the Government of Nepal or any labour, he or she shall not get
immunity from the performance of such liability by the reason of the revocation
of the license.
The Department or Office may suspend as prescribed the license of
any labour supplier if such a labour supplier fails to comply with the terms
specified in and directions given under this Act and the rules framed under this
If any labour supplier fails to comply with the terms specified in and
directions given under this Act and the rules framed under this Act, the Department
or Office may impose on such a labour supplier a fine not exceeding twenty-five
thousand rupees for the first time.
Payment of remuneration and other benefits: (1) In the event of revocation of
the license of a labour supplier, such a labour supplier shall pay such amount of
remuneration and other benefits as is payable to a labour within fifteen days.
In the event of failure to pay the amount of remuneration and other
benefits receivable by a labour within the period specified in sub-section (1), the
Department or Office that has issued the license shall arrange the payment of such
amount from the deposit or bank guarantee furnished or given by such a labour
supplier to such a labour at the time of obtaining the license.
Where the amount of deposit or bank guarantee is not sufficient to
pay the remuneration and other benefits pursuant to sub-section (2), the payment
shall be made on pro rata basis. If such a labour supplier body is liquidated or
dissolved, payment of the remaining remuneration and other benefits shall be made
in accordance with the prevailing law. If such a body is continuing other activities
without being dissolved or liquidated, the Office shall give an order for the
payment of such remuneration and benefits from its other properties.
Obligations of the main employer: (1) The main employer shall, while
employing a labour through a licensee labour supplier, so employ him or her in
accordance with the agreement entered with such a labour supplier.
The main employer shall, before entering into the agreement,
arrange for the provision of such remuneration and benefits as may not be less
than that specified in this Act or the rules framed under this Act to the labour.
The main employer shall regularly obtain information as to whether
or not the labour supplier has provided the remuneration and benefits regularly to
the labour employed through such a labour supplier.
If, while obtaining information pursuant to sub-section (3), it is
found that the labour supplier has not provided the remuneration and benefits to
the labour, the main employer shall immediately recommend the labour supplier
to provide such remuneration and benefits and give information thereof to the
Department or Office as well.
If the labour supplier fails to provide the remuneration and benefits
to the labour in spite of the request made pursuant to sub-section (4), the main
employer shall give information thereof to the Department or Office.
If information is received pursuant to sub-section (5) or information
is received through any other means about the labour supplier’s failure to provide
the remuneration and benefits to a labour, the Department or Office may make
payment from the deposit or bank guarantee furnished by such a labour supplier
at the time of obtaining the license.
The main employer shall take or make such measures and provisions
or arrangements as required to be taken or made at the workplace for occupational
safety and health.
If the remuneration or benefits to be provided to the labour pursuant
to the prevailing law increase after the agreement between the labour supplier and
the main employer has been made, the main employer shall add and pay such
increased remuneration or benefits.
No labour shall be supplied from any enterprise established with the
involvement of the main employer or of any manager or director or family
member, on his or her behalf.
Other provisions relating to the obligations of the main employer
shall be as prescribed.
To make inspection, supervision and monitoring: (1) The Office shall regularly
make inspection and monitoring as to whether or not the labour supplier has acted
in accordance with this Act or the rules framed under this Act and the directions
and conditions given and prescribed pursuant to this Act and the rules framed
under this Act.
If it is found from an on-site inspection, monitoring or any other
means that any labour supplier has not acted pursuant to this Act and the rules
framed under this Act or the conditions specified as applicable to him or her, the
Office may give necessary direction to the labour supplier.
It shall be the duty of the concerned labour supplier to comply with
the direction given pursuant to sub-section (2).
Liability of labours to rest on the main employer: Where any main employer
employs any labour by supplying such a labour through a person or company who
has not obtained the license to supply labours pursuant to this Act or contrary to
the provisions of this Act, such a labour shall be deemed to be a labour of the main
employer.
Prohibition on collecting fee from labour: No labour supplier shall collect any
kind of fee or commission from any labour whom it has supplied.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Occupation Safety and Health
Formulation of safety and health Policy: (1) Subject to the provisions of this
Act, the rules framed under this Act and directions given pursuant to this Act and
the rules framed under this Act, the employer shall formulate and implement a
policy on safety and health of the labours and other persons at the workplace.
The policy formulated pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be registered
with the Office.
Other provisions relating to the safety and health policy to be
formulated by the employer shall be as prescribed.
The Office shall regularly monitor as to whether or not the safety
and health policy formulated by the employer under this Section has been
complied with.
Duties of employer towards labour: (1) The duties of the employer towards the
labour in respect of occupational safety and health shall be as follows:
To make safe environment for work by making appropriate
safety and health arrangements at the workplace,
To make provision for the use, operation, storing and
transportation of chemical, physical or biological materials
or equipment so that it would not adversely affect the safety
and health,
To provide necessary information, notice and training
relating to the safety and health to the labour, as required,
To provide necessary training and information in an
appropriate language to the labour in relation to the use and
operation of the equipment or chemical, physical or
biological materials related to the work,
To make proper arrangement for the safe entry and exit from
the workplace,
To provide personal safety means to the labour, as required,
To make such other provisions as prescribed.
The employer shall not collect any fee or charge from a labour in
consideration for the provision of any safety related facility or equipment to the
labour.
Duties of employer towards non-labour: (1) The employer shall make such
provision as may be necessary to avoid any adverse effect on the safety and health
of any non-labour who walks in and out of, or passes through, the workplace.
Where any operating system of the workplace is likely to cause any
harmful effect or risk on the safety or health of any person, the employer shall
make arrangement for giving, putting a signal or providing information in that
respect.
Any enterprise that uses or manufactures chemical materials shall
so manage that the chemical substance, gas or any other thing emitting during the
operation of its business does not cause any adverse effect on the local animals,
vegetation, human beings and environment.
Duties of the responsible person: (1) It shall be the duty of the responsible person
to ensure whether any workplace, equipment, product or material is safe and
healthy for the concerned work.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "responsible person" means
any person who has the ownership or control over the workplace, equipment,
product or material, and this term also includes any person or organization
assigned with the ownership or control in accordance with the agreement, if any,
made in relation to the chief of such a workplace, use of the equipment, product
or material.
Duties of manufacturers, importers and suppliers: (1) The duties of the
manufacturer, importer or supplier of any equipment, product or material to be
used at the workplace shall be as follows:
To manufacture, import and supply equipment, product or material
found suitable from the examination for the operation and use at the
workplace from the viewpoint of safety and health;
To determine such a method or process for using or operating such
equipment, product or material properly so that the safety and health
of the concerned persons at the workplace is not affected adversely,
To identify possible risks of causing adverse effect on the safety
and health by the use of such equipment, product or material,
To conduct necessary research, use or experiment to eliminate or
minimize the risks identified pursuant to clause (c),
Provided that where there is a reasonable ground to believe
in the results of any research, use or experiment conducted earlier
by any other person such a research, use or experiment may be given
recognition.
To prepare a manual in order to provide all the information relating
to the necessary measures required to be taken, from the viewpoint
of safety and health, during the operation and use of the equipment,
product or material to be operated or used at the workplace.
A person or organization that manufactures or installs any
equipment to be used in the workplace shall give the employer a report in writing
to the effect that such equipment so manufactured or installed, if used properly,
will not cause any adverse effect on the safety or health of any person.
If any equipment, product or material is not used in accordance with
the information or instruction provided by the manufacturer or supplier providing
such equipment, product or material in relation to the use of the equipment,
product or material, such equipment or material shall, for the purpose of this
Section, not be deemed to have been used properly.
The manufacturer, importer or supplier of any chemical material to
be used in the workplace shall provide the employer with such other details
including the chemical safety data sheet in relation such material as prescribed.
Duties of labour: (1) The duties of the labour in relation to occupational safety
and health shall be as follows:
Not to perform any such act in the workplace intentionally or
recklessly that may cause adverse effect or risk on the safety
and health of him or her or of others,
To provide necessary assistance to the employer and
concerned person in the fulfilment of any duties mentioned
in this Chapter,
To obtain information about the manuals, instructions and
other matters prepared for the operation and use of the
equipment, product or material to be operated and used in the
workplace safely and cautiously,
To operate and use the workplace, equipment, product or
material safely and cautiously in accordance with the
manuals, information and instructions prepared for the
operation and use of such a workplace, equipment, product
or material, and
To use compulsorily the personal safety equipment provided
by the employer.
To form safety and health committee: (1) The employer shall form such a safety
and health committee with representation of the labours also as prescribed in an
enterprise where twenty or more labours are employed.
For the purpose of sub-section (1), the labours employed through a
labour supplier shall also be counted.
The functions, duties and powers of the safety and health committee
formed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as follows:
To give advice to the employer regularly on the arrangement
on safety and health required to be made in the workplace
and on making such an arrangement effective,
To evaluate the arrangement on safety and health made in the
workplace, and draw the attention of the employer for
making such an arrangement more effective,
In the event of failure to do the act in spite of the attention
drawn pursuant to clause (b), to give information thereof to
the Office,
To review each year the safety and health policy formulated
pursuant to Section 68,
To perform such other functions as prescribed.
Saving from action: No employer shall take disciplinary action against any labour
for the sole reason that he or she has committed the following act:
To give information, notice or make or assist in the making of a
complaint against the employer as to failure to make arrangements
on safety and health,
To do any act in the capacity of a member of the safety and health
committee referred to in Section 74, or
To stop the work pursuant to Section 76 or 77 because of occurrence
of an immediate danger to safety and health.
To stop work in the case of immediate danger: (1) Where it is likely to cause
bodily injury or risk to, or serious effect on the health of, a labour or other person
or cause unexpected loss or damage to any equipment, product or material if any
work is not stopped immediately, the labour involved in such a work shall give
information thereof to the employer or responsible person referred to in Section
The employer or responsible person shall, upon receipt of the
information referred to in sub-section (1), immediately give appropriate direction
in that respect.
Where the employer or responsible person is not available for the
time being for the purpose of giving information referred to in sub-section (1), the
labour himself or herself may stop such a work.
Where the work is stopped pursuant to sub-section (3), the labour
who so stops the work shall immediately give information thereof to the employer
or responsible person through the fastest means.
The employer or responsible person shall, upon receipt of the
information referred to in sub-section (4), immediately inquire into the matter and
prevent or mitigate the risks resulted therefrom.
Where there arises any dispute between the labour and the employer
as to whether or not there has arisen any risk necessitating the stoppage of the
work and the provision made for the prevention or mitigation of the risk is
adequate, any party may make an application to the Office for the settlement of
such a dispute.
On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-section (6), the Office
shall settle such a dispute upon examining the matter and hearing both the parties,
and also examining the evidence if so required.
A decision made for the settlement of such a dispute shall be final
and both the employer and the labour shall abide by such a decision.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, no
work shall be stopped with the intention of causing loss or damage, trouble to or
satisfy enmity with the employer.
During the time when the work remains stopped pursuant to this
Section, the employer may engage a labour in another work subject to the
conditions of his or her service.
Direction to stop the work: (1) Where it appears from the inspection or any other
source that there exists a ground that an immediate danger has arisen or is likely
to arise in the safety and health of the labour or other person in the workplace of
any enterprise, the Office may give direction to the employer to immediately stop
the work in such a workplace.
A direction to be issued pursuant to sub-section (1) shall set out,
inter alia, the reason and ground why such danger has so arisen.
While issuing the direction pursuant to sub-section (1), the Office
may, if it appears that it is not appropriate to operate or use any equipment in the
workplace, issue an order forbidding the use of such equipment, and while so
issuing the order, it may also affix a seal or Tancha on such equipment or any part
of it.
If the Office gives direction to stop a work pursuant to sub-section
(1), the employer shall immediately stop the work.
The employer who is not satisfied with a direction given by the
Office pursuant to this Section may make an application to the Department within
seven days of the receipt of such a direction.
The Department shall settle the application made under sub-section
(5) within fifteen days.
It is not allowed to do the work during the period referred to in subsection (6).
Provided that if the Office gives information during that period that any
immediate threat has not arisen to the safety and health of persons, the work may
be resumed.
Special provisions relating to occupational safety and health: (1) The safety
and health standards to be followed by the enterprise engaged in the work related
to the following matters shall be as prescribed:
Provisions relating to protection of eyes,
Provisions relating to protection from chemical substance,
Provisions relating to operation of pressure plants,
Provisions relating to safeguard of machines,
Provisions relating to lifting of load,
Other necessary provisions.
Provisions relating to the inspection of pressure plants and boilers
shall be as prescribed.
Provisions relating to information about the establishment of any
enterprise and other provisions relating to occupational safety and health shall be
as prescribed.
To give information: Where any accident occurs or any person is injured or dies
in an accident or suffers from any occupational disease in the workplace, the
employer shall give information thereof to the Office immediately.
Arrangements for control of infectious diseases to be made: (1) The employer
shall make necessary arrangements for the prevention and control of infectious
diseases in the workplace.
If any labour suffering from any infectious disease needs to undergo
treatment, he or she may be prevented from attending the work during the period
of treatment.
Where the sick leave of such a labour is not sufficient for treatment
pursuant to sub-section (2), the employer may give direction to that labour to make
adjustment with any other leave or take the special unpaid leave.
It shall be the duty of the concerned labour to abide by the direction
given pursuant to sub-section (3).
To engage in easier work: (1) Where any female labour is pregnant, she shall
give information thereof, accompanied also by a proof showing her health checkup, to the employer.
If the information referred to in sub-section (1) is received, the
employer shall generally so engage such a female labour in work that it does not
cause any adverse effect on her health.
Special provisions relating to treatment of occupational disease: (1) Where any
labour suffers from any such occupational disease as prescribed while doing work
of any enterprise, the enterprise shall provide the labour with such treatment
expense as prescribed for the treatment of such a disease and such amount of
compensation as prescribed, if such a disease is incurable.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
enterprise shall not be required to provide the amount of treatment expense or
compensation referred to in sub-section (1) if the labour is entitled to the amount
of expense for the treatment of the occupational disease or compensation from the
Social Security Fund.
Direction may be issued: (1) The Office may make a sudden or periodic
inspection as to whether or not the employer has made safety and health related
arrangements.
If, while making inspection pursuant to sub-section (1), it is not
found that the employer has made the arrangement on safety and health in the
workplace as referred to in this Act or the prevailing law, the Office shall give a
direction to the concerned employer specifying the period for making arrangement
thereof.
Provided that if it appears that failure to make such arrangement
immediately will cause danger to the safety and health of labours or other persons
or adverse effect on the environment, it shall give direction indicating the matter
to make such arrangement immediately.
The Office may give direction to the employer to provide necessary
information and details regarding any accident occurred in the workplace,
occupational disease or safety and health of labours and other persons.
It shall be the duty of the concerned employer to abide by or cause
to be abided by the direction given pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3).

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Industry or Service of Special Nature
Provisions relating to tea-estate labours: (1) The obligations of the employers
towards the tea-estate labours shall be as follows:
To make arrangement for suitable quarters within the tea-estate for
the labours who do not have their own settlement near the tea-state
and their dependent family members,
To make arrangement for free first-aid-service for the treatment of
minor injuries sustained by the labours and their dependent family
members and for trained medical staff, medical items for that
purpose,
To make arrangement for the easy availability of the daily
consumable goods if there is no market facility near the tea-estate,
To make proper arrangement for sports and entertainment for
physical and mental development of the tea-estate labours and their
dependent family members.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, -
"Tea estate" means a tea-estate registered pursuant to the
prevailing law, and this term also includes a factory, other
physical infrastructures established within the tea-estate and
its premises.
"Tea-estate labour" means a labour who does the work of
digging, ploughing, levelling, cutting, plucking, scattering,
sowing, collecting, uprooting or similar other work in the
land of a tea estate, and this term also includes a labour who
is engaged in tea processing and any other work of the tea
estate.
"Dependent family" means his or her family member who
lives with a tea-estate labour and whom he or she has to
maintain.
This Section shall not be deemed to bar the making of an agreement
between the labour working in a tea-estate and the employer in relation to any
work of the tea-estate to be performed.
Special provisions relating to construction labours: (1) The obligations of the
employers towards the construction labours shall be as follows:
To provide such tools, equipment and material in a sufficient
quantity as may be required for construction,
To make arrangement for temporary quarters to the labours who do
not have settlement near the construction workplace, clean drinking
water and supply of necessary food items,
To make appropriate safety arrangement in the construction
workplace.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, -
"Construction work" means the construction of a building,
road, bridge, canal, tunnel, internal or inter-state waterway,
railway, construction work or construction of a power
station,
telecommunication,
telephone
telegraphic
structure and similar other structure, and this term also
includes installation of any machine, tool or equipment in
that structure.
"Construction labour" means a labour who is engaged in the
construction work.
Any person or organization who takes responsibility or contract for
the construction work shall be deemed to be the employer for the purpose of this
When fixing the rate of remuneration and other benefits for the
construction labours, representation of the trade union of the concerned level and
of the construction entrepreneurs’ association shall be compulsory.
Other provisions relating to the construction labours shall be as
prescribed.
Provisions relating to transport labours: (1) The obligations of the employers
towards the transport labours shall be as follows:
To make compulsory provision for at least two drivers to
rotationally drive any motor vehicle transporting passengers in a
long route,
To make arrangement for taking rest by drivers of any motor vehicle
operating in a long route in different places before reaching the final
destination,
To provide a transport labour who is employed to work for more
than eight hours a day with remuneration at the rate of 1.5 times of
the remuneration receivable by the transport labour,
Provided that if a trip allowance, food allowance or similar
other allowance is to be provided to the transport labour, he or she
shall be entitled to only one of such allowance and 1.5 times amount
that he or she chooses.
If the motor vehicle breaks down before reaching the final
destination or is required to be stopped in one place for any reason,
the labour is to be provided with fifty percent of the allowance
receivable by him or her at the time when the motor vehicle is in
running condition,
To keep in the motor vehicle such medicines and medical treatment
items as may be necessary for first-aid treatment.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, -
"Long route" means a long route determined pursuant to the
“Transportation
work”
means
transportation
mechanical means of passengers, animals or goods from one
place to another.
"Transport labour" means any labour engaged in the
transportation work.
No transport labour who drives a motor vehicle shall consume
alcoholic substance at least twelve hours before driving the vehicle until the final
destination is reached.
A labour who acts contrary to sub-section (2) shall be deemed to
have committed a misconduct, and the concerned employer may remove him or
her from the service.
Provided that an opportunity to submit explanation shall be provided to
such a labour before so removing him or her from the service.
If the employer wishes to remove any labour working in a motor
vehicle in his or her ownership because of a change in ownership effected from
the sale of the vehicle or otherwise, the employer may terminate employment
relation by providing him or her with such benefits as payable for retirement.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to an enterprise that operates
motor vehicles.
Special provisions relating to tourism labours: (1) The obligations of the
employers towards the tourism labours shall be as follows:
To provide sufficient quantity of medicines and medical treatment
items for first aid when sending labours to the workplace,
To rescue, or cause to be rescued, without delay any labour who gets
in an accident or serious health problem.
When sending a labour to the workplace as mentioned in sub-section
(1), the employer shall provide the labour with any one of such facility out of a
field allowance, food allowance or similar other allowance or 1.5 times
remuneration for overtime work that he or she chooses.
The employer operating any hotel, motel, restaurant, jungle safari
or other business shall distribute, as prescribed, the service fees collected pursuant
to the collective agreement.
Provisions relating to domestic labours: (1) The Government of Nepal may fix
separate minimum remuneration for domestic labours.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,
provisions relating to public leave, weekly leave of domestic labours and other
provisions related thereto shall be as prescribed.
Where the employer has arranged for food and shelter of a domestic
labour in his or her house or assisted in his or her study, the labour may deduct the
amount for such purpose from the remuneration of the labour.
The employer shall allow a domestic labour to celebrate festivals as
per his or her culture, religion or tradition.
Provisions relating to seasonal enterprises: (1) If any seasonal enterprise is
closed during the off-season, the labours working in such an enterprise shall be
kept in reserve during the period of its closure.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the term “seasonal
enterprise” means an enterprise which can be operated in a particular season only,
and this term also includes an enterprise which cannot be operated for more than
one hundred eighty days in a year.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the
employer shall provide a labour who is in regular employment with an amount
equal to twenty-five percent of the remuneration to which he or she is entitled
during the period of off-season when the seasonal enterprise remains closed.
If there arises a question of whether or not any enterprise is a
seasonal enterprise, it shall be as decided by the Office.
Provisions relating to enterprise which is incorporated in foreign country and
operates business in Nepal: If any foreign enterprise involved in the promotion
of any business or sale of any goods or any other activity in Nepal violates the
employment contract entered into with its representative or labour in Nepal, such
a representative or labour may file a complaint to the Office or Labour Court in
accordance with this Act.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Fair Labour Practice
To observe fair labour practice: The employer, enterprise and trade union shall
observe fair labour practice in their conduct with each other in the course of their
respective activity.
Deemed to be unfair labour practice: (1) The employer and trade union shall not
commit, or cause to commit, any unfair labour practice referred to in sub-section
(2) or (3).
If any employer does any of the following acts, the employer shall
be deemed to have committed the unfair labour practice:
Not to comply with the labour law or cause such non-compliance,
To restrict the exercise of any right conferred by the labour law,
To create knowingly a false evidence with intent to take action
against any labour,
To commit any act with the sole intention to trouble or harass a
labour knowingly,
To interfere or cause interference in the formation, operation and
administrative functions of the trade union,
To continue the lock-out declared unlawful,
To assault or manhandle any labour,
To provoke or incite any labour with an intent to create enmity or
animosity among the labours.
If the trade union commits any of the following acts, it shall be
deemed to have committed the unfair labour practice:
To pressurize or threaten any labour to or not to become a member
of any union,
To collect donation or assistance forcibly,
To picket or surround the employer’s private residence or other
enterprise except the workplace or causing such picketing or
surrounding,
To assault the employer or his or her representative or any labour or
do any other illegal activity in order to have their demand fulfilled
or causing such assault or activity,
To commit any act of damaging the employer’s property
intentionally.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Inspection
Provisions relating to Office and inspectors: (1) The Government of Nepal may,
for the implementation of this Act and prevailing Nepal law on labour, establish
such Labour Offices as may be required.
The districts which fall within the jurisdiction of the Labour Offices
established pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as specified by the Ministry.
The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, appoint one inspector or more than one inspectors for any area according
to the need.
Powers, functions and duties of the Office: (1) The powers, functions and duties
of the Office shall be as follows:
To carry out monitoring as to whether or not the minimum
remuneration, allowance fixed pursuant to this Act or benefits
receivable pursuant to the collective agreement and the rights
conferred by the prevailing Nepal law to the labours and employers
have been implemented,
To carry out regular monitoring as to whether or not there has been
effective implementation of this Act and the rules framed under this
Act, and give necessary direction to the concerned party for their
implementation,
To give trainings on the standards and codes of conduct made
pursuant to this Act and other prevailing labour laws, and carry out
regular monitoring as to whether or not such standards or codes of
conduct have been implemented,
To provide necessary technical assistance to labours and employers
if such assistance is sought for conducting necessary trainings,
To give direction to the employer to provide the occupational safety
and health standards or employee bye-laws rules or other relevant
documents,
To implement the collective agreement entered into between the
employer and labours and arbitral awards,
To inspect as to whether or not children have been employed, and
immediately rescue them if found employed and take action against
such an employer,
To make inspection as to whether or not the employer has
implemented the provisions relating to occupational safety and
health provisions referred to in Chapter-12 in the enterprise and
workplace,
To observe or inspect the machine, tool, equipment, goods or
material installed in the workplace, and examine whether or not such
machine, tool, equipment, goods or material are of prescribed
standards, and collect samples thereof if the same needs to be tested,
To make, or cause to be made, periodic or casual inspection of the
enterprise or workplace,
To order the concerned enterprise or its office-bearers to provide
any register, deed and document including the electronic record
maintained in the enterprise or workplace, and take control of the
original register, deed or document or a copy thereof upon entering
such an or workplace in the event of failure to so provide,
To obtain information or notice on necessary matters from the
employer, managerial level labour or other labour of the enterprise,
If it appears so necessary, to summon the employer, managerial
level labour or other labour of the enterprise to appear in the Office
and take his or her statement,
If such information is received during the inspection of the
workplace or enterprise or from any other source that the employer
or labour or trade union has acted contrary to this Act and the rules
framed under this Act, to give necessary direction to immediately
rectify such an act,
To maintain records of the applications or documents received in
the Office or information received from any other sources, give
evidence of the registration of such applications or documents or
maintain records of the decisions, orders and deeds of mediation or
provide a certified copy of any document to one who requests for
the same,
To perform such other functions as specified by this Act and
prevailing Nepal law to be performed by the Office, or
To perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
The Office may, if it appears necessary to obtain assistance of the
local administration, police or any other body in exercising the power referred to
in this Section, request the local administration, police or concerned body to render
such assistance.
It shall be the duty of the local administration, police and concerned
body to render such assistance to the Office if so requested pursuant to sub-section
Powers, functions and duties of inspector: (1) Performance of such functions
and duties and exercise of such powers as to be performed and exercised by the
Office shall be made by the inspector and subordinate employee as prescribed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if this Act
or other law so mentions any function as to be performed by the occupational
safety and health inspector himself or herself, the occupational safety and health
inspector shall have the power to perform for and on behalf of the Office such
function or inspection of the machineries and tools of the factor, occupational
safety and health related function and other technical function.
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall be deemed to bar
any Office from engaging any occupational safety and health inspector serving in
another office or a technician having knowledge in the concerned subject in the
function of inspection and the labour inspector from performing the function
accordingly, for and on its behalf, if the Office has no occupational safety and
health inspector.
Obligations of inspector or employee: (1) The obligations of the inspector or
employee deputed to inspect any enterprise or workplace pursuant to Section 95
shall be as follows:
To enter any enterprise or workplace only after showing his or her
identity card,
To give a written receipt thereof while taking custody of any
register, document, record or goods,
To keep the identity of any complainant confidential if he or she
requests to do so,
To perform the duties of his or her office without causing hinderance
in the work of the enterprise or workplace,
To keep such notice, information or data as received during
inspection confidential except as required to be disclosed in
accordance with the law.
Where the inspector or any employee who is deputed to inspect any
enterprise or workplace fails to perform the duties referred to in sub-section (1),
does any act that is disrespectful or contrary to the duties of his or her office or
causes any loss or damage by doing any act with mala fide intention, the concerned
person shall give information thereof to the competent authority through the
Office.
If the inspector or employee is found guilty upon making necessary
inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2), the competent authority may take departmental
action pursuant to the prevailing law.
To render necessary assistance: It shall be the duty of the concerned employer,
labour and trade union to render necessary assistance to the inspector or employee
deputed to inspect the enterprise or workplace in the function of inspection.
Report to be submitted: The inspector or employee shall submit a report setting
out such particulars as prescribed to the Office within fifteen days from the date
of completion of the inspection of the enterprise or workplace made pursuant to
this Chapter, except as otherwise directed.
Power of the Office to give direction: (1) On receipt of the report pursuant to

Section 98, the Office may, upon studying it as required, give direction
immediately to make the improvement, if any, required to be made in relation to
any work, working procedure or other matter of the enterprise or workplace or
labour or trade union and stop any act, if any, being committed contrary to law.
A party who is not satisfied with the direction referred to in subsection (1) may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thirty-five days.
The decision made by the Labour Court on the appeal made pursuant
to sub-section (2) shall be final.
Labour audit to be made: (1) Each enterprise shall make a labour audit as
prescribed as to whether or not acts and actions are being performed by the
enterprise in accordance with this Act, Regulation and prevailing law and prepare
a report thereof.
The report referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided to the
Office or inspector during inspection made pursuant to this Chapter or as and when
so demanded by the Office or inspector.
Making application in convenient Office: A labour of any enterprise with its
branch or workplace in an area where there are more than one Office may make
an application to the Office which is convenient to him or her, and the concerned
Office shall, on receipt of such an application, conduct hearing on the application.

Chapter-16
Provisions Relating to Council and Committee
Formation of Central Labour Advisory Council: (1) There shall be formed a
Central Labour Advisory Council as follows for giving advice on labour matters
to the Government of Nepal:
Minister or Minister of State for Labour and
Employment
- Chairperson
Secretary, Ministry of Finance
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employment
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and
Transport
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Agricultural Development
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Industry
-Member
Secretary, Ministry of Health
-Member
Director General, Department of Labour
-Member
Executive Director, Social Security Fund
-Member
Executive Director, Vocational Skill Development
Training Centre
-Member
Five persons including at least two women
nominated as prescribed by the Ministry from
amongst the employers
-Member
Five persons including at least two women
nominated as prescribed by the Ministry from
amongst the trade union federations
-Member
Joint Secretary (Responsible for the concerned
Division), Ministry of Labour and Employment
-Member Secretary
The tenure of the members referred to in clauses (k) and (l) of subsection (1) shall be three years, and they may be re-nominated.
While nominating the members pursuant to clauses (k) and (l) of
sub-section (1), the Ministry shall make nomination on the recommendation of the
employers’ association, in case of employers, and of the Joint Trade Union
Coordination Centre, in case of trade union federations.
The members referred to in clauses (k) and (l) of sub-section (1)
may nominate their alternative members to take part, in their absence, in the
meetings of the Council.
Functions, duties and powers of the Council: (1) The functions, duties and
powers of the Council shall be as follows:
To give advice and suggestions to the Government of Nepal on
labour policies,
To give necessary advice and suggestions to the Government of
Nepal for making timely reforms in the labour laws,
To give suggestions to the Government of Nepal in relation to the
ratification and implementation of any labour related international
convention to which Nepal is a party,
To give advice and suggestions to the Government of Nepal in
relation to the report to be submitted by the Government of Nepal
under any labour related international convention to which Nepal is
a party,
To prepare occupational safety and health standards and
recommend the same to the Government of Nepal,
To prepare codes of conduct on fair labour practice and recommend
the same to the Government of Nepal,
To give advice and suggestions to the Government of Nepal for the
formulation of policies concerning vocational training and skill
development (apprentice) training,
To make necessary coordination with the Government of Nepal,
employers and trade unions for maintaining industrial peace, sound
industrial relation and minimizing labour disputes,
To make necessary coordination with the Government of Nepal,
employers and trade unions for enhancing employment and
productivity,
To frame and issue directives on collective bargaining as required,
To perform such other functions as prescribed.
The Council may form any committee or taskforce, as required, for
the performance of its functions.
The functions, duties and powers of the committee or taskforce
formed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be as specified by the Council at the time
of formation of such a committee.
The secretariat of the Council shall be located in the Ministry.
Office of member of the Council to be vacant: (1) The office of any member of
the Council referred to in clause (k) or (l) of sub-section (1) of Section 102 shall
become vacant in the following circumstance:
If the member submits resignation in writing to the Ministry through
the chairperson,
If the member remains absent from three consecutive meetings of
the Council without giving any notice,
Provided that this provision shall not apply if the alternative
member attends the meeting.
If his or her tenure expires, or
If he or she dies.
Before removing any member of the Council from his or her office
pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1), he or she shall be provided with an
opportunity to defend.
Where the office of any member falls vacant pursuant to sub-section
(1), nomination of another person shall be made for the remainder of tenure from
the same sector where that member was nominated from and by following the same
procedure.
Provisions relating to meetings of the Council: (1) Meetings of the Council shall
be held as required at the date, place and time specified by the chairperson of the
Council.
Provided that the interval between the two meetings shall not be more than
four months.
The chairperson shall call a meeting within fifteen days if one fourth
of the total number of members of the Council makes a written request for calling
a meeting.
The member-secretary of the Council shall give a notice along with
the agenda of the meeting to all the members at least twenty-four hours in advance
of the time when such meeting is scheduled.
The presence of more than at least fifty percent of the total number
of members, representing the Government of Nepal, employers and trade unions,
shall constitute a quorum for the meeting of the Council.
The chairperson of the Council shall preside over the meeting of the
Council, and in his or her absence, the secretary of the Ministry shall preside it
over.
A labour expert may be invited at the meeting of the Council.
Any decision of the Council shall be taken on the basis of consensus.
If consensus is not reached pursuant to sub-section (7), a decision
shall be taken on the basis of majority of the members representing the
Government of Nepal, employers and unions.
There shall be maintained a separate minute book for recording the
decisions of the meetings of the Council, and such decisions shall be authenticated
by the member-secretary of the Council.
Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Council shall be as
determined by the Council itself.
Members of the Council shall get such meeting allowance as
specified by the Government of Nepal.
Fixation of minimum remuneration: (1) The Ministry shall, on recommendation
of the Minimum Remuneration Fixation Committee referred to in Section 107, fix
the minimum remuneration of labours in every two years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Ministry
may fix the minimum remuneration in the event of failure of the Minimum Wage
Fixation Committee referred to in Section 107 to recommend the minimum
remuneration due to absence of consensus.
The Ministry shall publish the minimum remuneration fixed
pursuant to this Section in the Nepal Gazette.
The minimum remuneration fixed pursuant to sub-section (3) shall
come into force on the first day of the new financial year.
Provided that if it is otherwise agreed between the trade union and the
employer concerning the date of coming into force of the minimum remuneration,
it shall come into force accordingly.
When fixing the minimum remuneration in accordance with other
prevailing law, such remuneration shall not be so fixed as to be less than the
remuneration fixed pursuant to this Act.
Minimum remuneration fixation committee: (1) The Ministry shall form a
permanent minimum remuneration fixation committee as prescribed, consisting of
representatives from the Government of Nepal, trade unions and employers'
associations for the purpose of recommending the minimum remuneration of
labours.
The committee formed pursuant to sub-section (1) may, while
recommending the minimum remuneration of labours, recommend the minimum
remuneration of labours applicable for the whole of Nepal or for enterprises or
industries of any specific sector or nature or specific sector of employment.
The grounds for recommendation of the minimum remuneration
shall be determined by the minimum remuneration fixation committee itself
referred to in sub-section (1).
The minimum remuneration fixation committee referred to in subsection (1) shall commence the process of reviewing the minimum remuneration
from the month of Baishak (mid April) in every two years.
Procedures and other provisions relating to the meetings of the
committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-17
Provisions Relating to Internal Management of Enterprise
Internal management may be made: (1) Every enterprise may, for the purpose
of its internal management, make a bye-law as required.
Any enterprise, when making a bye-law on service, conditions and
benefits of labours, or any competent body to approve the bye-law made by any
enterprise, when approving such a bye-law, shall do so make or approve as not to
be contrary to the minimum standards set forth in this Act and the collective
agreement.
The Ministry may, for the purpose of sub-section (1), make a model
bye-law as required.
Provided that it shall not be deemed to bar the Nepal Rastra Bank, in the
case of banks and financial institutions, and the regulatory authority, in the case
of other enterprises, from making bye-laws.
One copy of the bye-law made by an enterprise shall be registered
in the Office, such a bye-law shall be made available to any labour if he or she
wishes to look at.
The enterprise shall, when making or amending the bye-law, consult
the authorised trade union, if any, in the enterprise and an active trade union if
there is no such authorized trade union.
Where any provision of the bye-law made by the enterprise
contradicts with this Act, prevailing laws or collective agreement, the court may
void such a provision of the bye-law or give other appropriate order.
Transfer may be made: (1) The enterprise may transfer a labour from one office,
branch or unit of the enterprise to another office, branch or unit without causing
any adverse effect on the conditions of service and benefits of him or her and
without making difference in the nature and level of his or her work.
Provided that transfer may be made in a manner to make difference
in the nature and level of work in the following circumstance:
With the consent of the concerned labour,
Where the labour is promoted and placed,
As mentioned in the collective agreement, or
To transfer the labour to other work related to the training or skill
or educational qualification acquired by him or her.
Any labour employed in any one enterprise may, with his or her
consent, be transferred to another enterprise.
When making transfer pursuant to sub-section (2), an agreement
shall be made as prescribed between the enterprise making transfer and the
enterprise where the labour is transferred to on the matter that the service period
of the employee to be so transferred shall be added and the enterprise where the
labour is transferred to shall bear all benefits to the receivable on the basis of the
service period and on other conditions of service.
When transferring any labour from the workplace located in the
place of his or her permanent residence or to any other place from the existing
workplace, the employer shall provide benefits as prescribed.
To be deputed as representative: (1) Any enterprise may depute its labour to
another enterprise to work in the capacity of its representative.
Except as otherwise agreed when making deputation pursuant to
sub-section (1), the obligations relating to the service and benefits of such a labour
shall be vested in the enterprise making such deputation.
Formation of labour relation committee: (1) The employer of an enterprise
where ten or more than ten labours work shall form a labour relation committee as
prescribed.
The functions, duties and powers of the committee formed pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as follows:
To hold discussion as required for productivity increment
and improvement in the operating system,
To make an effort to settle any grievance in discussion with
the concerned party if the labour has or is likely to have such
a grievance,
To improve the working environment of the workplace,
To function in the capacity of occupational safety and health
committee until it is formed, and
To perform such other functions as prescribed.
The labour relation committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall
meet as required without adversely affecting the working hours of the enterprise.
Provisions relating to the formation, procedure and meeting of the
committee shall be as prescribed.
Performance evaluation of labours by enterprise: (1) An enterprise may have
performance evaluation of its labours generally once in a year.
The basis and procedure for the performance evaluation referred to
in sub-section (1) shall be determined in a just and reasonable manner.
The basis and procedure referred to in sub-section (2) shall be
notified to the labours before the period for the performance evaluation
commences.
Upon completion of the performance evaluation pursuant to subsection (1), the employer or the person designated by him or her shall discuss with
the concerned labour about his or her strengths and weaknesses and give a
reasonable opportunity to improve the weaknesses.
Where the concerned labour disagrees with the evaluation made
pursuant to sub-section (4), such a labour shall be required to sign the evaluation
form after providing him or her with an opportunity to note down disagreement.
Where a labour notes down disagreement pursuant to sub-section
(5), the enterprise shall make a provision for its review.
Other provisions relating to the performance evaluation of the
labours shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-18
Settlement of Individual Disputes
Submission of individual claims: (1) If any labour has an individual claim on any
matter related to the right conferred by this Act, Regulation, prevailing laws or
collective agreement, such a labour may make an application in writing to the
employer.
In the event of receipt of the application referred to in sub-section
(1), the employer shall receive the application and give its receipt to the labour.
In the event of receipt of the application referred to in sub-section
(1), the employer shall settle the dispute relating to such a claim within fifteen
days upon holding discussion with the concerned labour.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the period
for the settlement of dispute may be extended through consent between the
employer and the labour.
Application may be made to the Office: (1) The concerned party may, in the
following circumstance, make an application to the Office for the settlement by
mediation of the individual claim referred to in Section 113:
If the employer does not give a notice for discussion within seven
days from the date on which the application was made pursuant to
sub-section (1) of Section 113, or
Failing an agreement upon discussion held pursuant to sub-section
(3) of Section 113, after fifteen days from the date on which the
original application was made to the employer.
In the event of receipt of the application pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Office shall give the concerned employer and the labour a notice specifying
the date and time for discussion.
The Office shall settle the dispute relating to the claim within
twenty-one days from the date of receipt of the application pursuant to sub section
(1), by holding negotiations as required between the employer and the labour.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the period
for the settlement of dispute may be extended through consent between the Office,
employer and labour.
If an agreement is reached between the concerned employer and the
labour upon the negotiations referred to in sub-section (3), such a dispute relating
to the claim shall be deemed to have been settled.
The agreement reached pursuant to sub-section (5) shall be binding
on the concerned party.
Decision to be made by the Office: Where the problem could not be solved
pursuant to Section 114, the Office shall, on the basis of the available evidence,
make a decision within fifteen days.

Chapter-19
Settlement of Collective Disputes
Collective claim may be submitted: (1) Any enterprise employing ten or more
than ten labours shall have a collective bargaining committee as follows:
A team of negotiating representatives designated on behalf of the
elected authorized trade union of the enterprise,
In cases where election to the authorised trade union referred to in
clause (a) could not be held or where election has been held but its
term has expired, a team of negotiating representatives nominated
through mutual agreement of all the unions in the enterprise,
In cases where there is no authorised trade union referred to in
clause (a) or team referred to in clause (b), a team of representatives
supported with the signatures of more than sixty percent of the
labours working in the enterprise.
The collective bargaining committee may submit collective claims
or demands in writing to the employer on issues relating to the interest of the
labours.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no
collective claims or demands may be submitted on the following matters:
A matter which is contrary to the Constitution of Nepal,
A matter which contains an allegation with no evidence or basis and
is thus contrary to the interest of any one,
A matter which affects the personal conduct of any employer or
labour,
A matter which is not related to the enterprise,
Until the period specified in this Act lapses in cases where the
collective agreement has been made,
A matter relating to the rate of contribution and benefits specified
for the social security scheme.
The collective bargaining committee may consist of a maximum of
three to eleven members as prescribed, on the basis of the number of labours.
The collective bargaining committee formed pursuant to this
Section shall have the powers including that to submit collective claims or
demands, enter into agreement, file a case against any person or defend a case.
To hold negotiations on collective claims, demands: (1) In the event of
submission of collective claims, demands pursuant to Section 116, the concerned
employer shall, not later than seven days of the date of submission of such claims
or demands, give a notice in writing to the collective bargaining committee, stating
inter alia the venue and time for negotiation.
Where a notice is given pursuant to sub-section (1), the members of
the collective bargaining committee shall be present for negotiations at the venue
and time stated in the notice.
If, while conducting negotiations, any understanding or agreement
is reached between both the parties, the disputes relating to the collective claims,
demands shall be settled.
The understanding or agreement made pursuant to sub-section (3)
shall be binding for the concerned parties.
Settlement through mediation: (1) The concerned party may, in the following
circumstance, make an application to the Office for the settlement of collective
claims, demands through mediation:
Where the employer fails to give a notice to the collective
bargaining committee for negotiations within the period referred to
in sub-section (1) of Section 117, or
Where an agreement could not be reached upon negotiation held
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 117 not later than twenty-one
days from the date of submission of claims, demands.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to bar the extending
of the said period with the consent of the parties in cases where the
negotiation is going on.
In the event of receipt of an application pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Office shall summon the presence of the concerned parties and settle the
dispute through mediation.
The mediation proceeding referred to in sub-section (2) shall be
completed not later than thirty days from the date of receipt by the Office of the
application.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to bar the extending of the said
period with the consent of the parties in cases where the negotiation is going on.
The dispute relating to the collective claims, demands shall be
settled if an agreement is reached between both the parties upon the negotiation
held in presence of the Office pursuant to sub-section (3).
The agreement made pursuant to sub-section (4) shall be binding for
the concerned parties.
Settlement of dispute through arbitration: (1) Where mediation does not
succeed pursuant to Section 118, the dispute relating to the collective claims,
demands shall, in the following circumstance, be settled through arbitration:
If the collective bargaining committee and the employer agree to
settle the dispute relating to collective claims, demands through
arbitration,
If a collective dispute arises in an enterprise providing essential
services,
If a collective dispute arises in an enterprise within the special
economic zone, or
If the strike is prohibited by imposition of a state of emergency in
accordance with the Constitution.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term “essential
service” means any service which may, if interrupted, have an
adverse impact on the life, health and safety of the people across the
country or the people living in any part of the country.
Where the Ministry has a ground to believe that a financial crisis
may arise in the country as a result of ongoing or possible strike or lockout or that
the dispute needs to be settled by arbitration, the Ministry may give an order for
the settlement of any collective dispute through arbitration irrespective of the stage
of such a dispute.
For the purpose of sub-sections (1) and (2), the Ministry may form
an arbitration panel comprising representations from the labour, employer and
Government of Nepal.
Expenses of the arbitration panel to be formed pursuant to subsection (3) shall be borne by the Government of Nepal as prescribed.
Any party wishing to have the dispute settled through arbitration
shall submit claims in writing to the arbitrator as prescribed.
On receipt of the claims referred to in sub-section (5), the arbitrator
shall send a copy of such claims to the other party and provide an opportunity to
such party to submit counter-claims in that respect.
In conducting the proceeding referred to in this Section, the
arbitrator may consult or discuss with any expert.
Hearing shall be conducted at such date, time and place specified by
the arbitrator, and the arbitration proceeding shall not sojourn for the sole reason
that any party has remained absent or counter-claim has not been submitted.
The arbitrator shall make award not later than thirty days from the
date of completion of the hearing pursuant to sub-section (8).
The arbitrator may exercise such powers as the court has under the
prevailing laws in relation to the matters including examining the evidence, taking
depositions of witnesses, making on-site inspections, in connection with the
proceeding.
Except as otherwise provided for in the agreement by the parties,
other provisions relating to the arbitral proceeding shall be as determined by the
arbitrator.
Power to form labour arbitration tribunal: (1) The Government of Nepal may
form an independent labour arbitration tribunal for having mediation and
arbitration with regard to the collective dispute.
Where a labour arbitration tribunal is formed pursuant to subsection (1), the labour arbitration tribunal shall conduct the mediation and
arbitration proceedings referred to in this Chapter.
Other provisions relating to the labour arbitration tribunal shall be
as prescribed.
Right to strike for settlement of collective disputes: (1) The collective
bargaining committee may, if any of the following circumstances exists, organize
a strike for the settlement of any collective dispute:
If there exists no circumstance requiring compulsory arbitration
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 119,
If the arbitrator fails to perform the arbitral functions,
If an arbitration panel could not be formed within twenty-one days
from the date of application to the Ministry or decision is not made
requiring arbitration,
If award is not given by the arbitrator within the prescribed time,
If the employer refuses to enforce the arbitral award or challenges
such an award on legal grounds,
If, except where compulsory arbitration is to be made, any party
disagrees with the arbitral award pursuant to sub-section (2) of

Section 122.
In order to make a strike pursuant to sub-section (1), a written notice
along with the claims, demands, and also specifying the date from which the strike
is to commence shall be submitted to the employer in advance of thirty days, and
information thereof shall also be given to the local administration and the
concerned Labour Office.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if the
Ministry gives an order for the settlement of the dispute through arbitration
pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 119 after the notice on strike is given or the
strike is commenced pursuant to sub-section (2), they shall postpone such a strike
and participate in the arbitral process.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the
labours deputed as sentries and guards for the security of the enterprise shall not
be allowed to participate in the strike and do any act referred to in Section 125
during the time when they are assigned on duty.
Arbitral award and collective agreement to be binding: (1) If any collective
dispute is settled through compulsory arbitration pursuant to sub-section (1) of

Section 119, the arbitral award shall be binding on the concerned parties.
If any party to any dispute referred to arbitration in pursuance of the
order by the Ministry pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 119 who is not
satisfied with the arbitral award on the dispute fails to node down disagreement in
writing to the arbitrator not later than five working days from the date of the award,
such an award shall also ipso facto be binding on the concerned party after the
expiration of that period.
The collective agreement and arbitral award need to be registered in
the Office for record and enforcement thereof.
The collective agreement shall remain valid for two years from the
date of its entry into force, if any, specified in the agreement itself and, failing the
specification of such a date, from the date of signing of the agreement and from
the date of the arbitral award, if any, made, and shall be valid as of law.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the
provisions in the collective agreement or arbitral award shall continue to apply
unless and until it is amended or repealed by another collective agreement or
arbitral award.
Special provisions relating to the submission of collective claims, demands:
(1) Trade union associations which are active in the tea estate, carpet sector,
construction business, labour provider, transportation sector or any other group of
manufacturers producing similar nature of goods or service providers providing
similar nature of service or business as prescribed may form a collective
bargaining committee as prescribed and submit collective bargaining claims,
demands to the employers' association of the concerned group of industries.
The manner of submitting claims, demands referred to in subsection (1), procedure relating to collective bargaining and provisions relating to
the agreement shall be as prescribed.
In the case of the enterprise to which the collective agreement
referred to in this Section is applicable, no collective claims, demands and
agreement may be submitted and made pursuant to this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) of Section
122, the Ministry may issue an order that collective claims, demands and
negotiations should be submitted and held within a specified time. In the event of
issuance of such an order, it may happen earlier or later than the time specified in
the same sub-section of the same Section.
Right to lock-outs: (1) Where a strike is organized or continued without giving a
notice pursuant to this Act or the collective dispute could not be settled through
the procedure referred to in this Act, the management may, by giving justifiable
grounds, lock out the enterprise by obtaining approval of the Department.
Before making a lock-out pursuant to sub-section (1), the manager
shall issue a notice in advance of at least seven days, also specifying the date of
lock-out, for information to the labours that if the strike is not ended the lock-out
will be made.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2),
where there is a possibility of causing loss to the enterprise because of gherao,
riot, physical unrest etc. by the labours during the period of strike, the management
may lock out the enterprise. If the lock-out is so made, information along with the
justification for making such lock-out shall be given to the Office or Department
and the local administration not later than three days.
On receipt of the notice pursuant to sub-section (3), the local
administration shall immediately make necessary security arrangement in such a
workplace.
The Department may at any time declare the lock-out of any
enterprise illegal in case it appears to be unjustifiable or it is likely to disturb the
peace and security of the country or it is contrary to the economic interest of the
country.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, no
lock-out may be made in an enterprise that operates any essential service.
Picketing or assembly may be made: (1) With the objective of exerting pressure
to have fulfilled the demands when the strike or lock-out is continuing, the labours
may picket or assemble at the main entrance of the workplace or enterprise
peacefully.
In any circumstance other than the circumstance where strike or
lockout, they may picket or assemble before or after the working hours or during
the rest time without disturbing the work of the workplace or enterprise.
Even in cases where picketing or assembly is made pursuant to subsection (1), the labours may not do any act and action such as prohibiting others
from entering or leaving the workplace or enterprise or causing any loss or damage
to the workplace.
Employment contract not to be violated: No labour shall be deemed to have
violated the employment contract by the reason that he or she has made a strike,
lock-out or picketing or made a complaint in accordance with the law, and during
that period, the employment contract shall be deemed to continue to be effective.
Remuneration for strike or lock-out period: (1) Any labour who makes a strike
in a manner to be contrary to the prevailing law shall not be entitled to any
remuneration for the period of such a strike.
Labours shall be entitled to full remuneration for the period of lockout if such lock-out is made by the employer in a manner to be contrary to the
prevailing law.
If the collective agreement contains any agreement in relation to the
remuneration, the matter shall be governed accordingly; and failing such
agreement to that effect, the labour shall get half the remuneration for the period
of strike or lock-out made in fulfilment of the procedure of this Act.
If there arises any dispute as to whether any strike or lockout made
in an enterprise is contrary to law or not, the Department shall conduct necessary
inquiry and make decision not later than thirty-five days.
Prohibition on filing of case against loss: (1) Where any financial loss is caused
to the employer or labour because of a strike, picketing or lock-out made in
fulfilment of the procedures referred to in this Act, no case may be filed in any
court against any labour, collective bargaining committee, trade union or employer
involved in such a strike, picketing or lock-out in relation to such a loss.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any
person or group makes destruction or arson in the workplace or destruction of any
property in any other manner or causes physical damage, the amount equivalent to
the loss, damage may be recovered from such a person or group.
Collective bargaining or agreement to be made in good faith: (1) The trade
union or collective bargaining committee or employer shall, in making a collective
bargaining or collective agreement, do so in good faith.
Other provisions relating to the collective bargaining or agreement
shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-20
Provisions Relating to Conduct and Punishment
Observance of discipline and duties: It shall be the duty of each labour to
observe discipline and fulfil duties referred to in this Act or the rules framed under
this Act or the by-law.
Misconduct and punishment: (1) If a labour commits the following misconduct,
he or she may be reprimanded:
To remain absent from the work without having a leave sanctioned,
To leave the workplace without obtaining permission of the
management,
To appear late in work frequently without obtaining permission,
To disobey any order given in relation to the work by the employer
or any employee superior in level to him or her,
To commit such other misconduct as specified in the bye-law.
In the event of commission of any of the following misconducts,
remuneration equal to a maximum of one day may be deducted:
To refuse to receive any letter or notice given by the employer or
sentencing authority,
To take part in an illegal strike or force others to do so or make delay
or slow in work collectively,
To cause loss or damage to the enterprise by decreasing the
production or service recklessly or negligently,
To make attempt to take benefits by submitting false documents,
To not use the equipment provided by the employer if he or she is a
labour responsible for using such equipment,
To commit such other misconduct of similar nature as specified in
the bye-law.
In the event of commission of any of the following misconducts,
annual salary increment of one year may be withheld or promotion withheld for
one year:
To take any property outside the enterprise without the permission
of the competent person and use it or allow it to be used by any
unauthorized person,
To make attempt to make embezzlement in the employer’s
transaction,
To damage the employer’s property recklessly or negligently,
To stop the supply of food, water, telephone, electricity service or
prevent movement within the workplace,
To intentionally misuse, or cause loss or damage to any goods kept
or provisions made for the benefit, safety or health of the labours,
To commit such other misconduct of similar nature as specified in
the by-law.
A labour may be dismissed from the service if he or she commits
any of the following misconducts:
To batter or cause bodily injury to, or take hostage the employer,
any labour, customer or any person concerned with the workplace
with or without the use of arms or weapon, or cause unrest or
destruction in the area of the enterprise,
To take or give a bribe,
To steal any one’s property in the workplace,
To make financial misappropriation in the enterprise,
To intentionally cause damage to any property that belongs to or is
in the custody or use of the employer,
To remain absent from the work for more than thirty consecutive
days without having a leave sanctioned,
To do any act of divulging secrecy of any production technology
related formula or confidential information of the enterprise or
workplace where he or she is working with the intention of causing
loss or damage to such an enterprise,
To act in collaboration with a competitive employer in the similar
nature of business of the enterprise or carry on any competitive
business on his or her own or provide any secret information of the
enterprise where he or she is employed to any competitive employer,
To get convicted by the court of any criminal offense involving
moral turpitude during the period of employment,
To make and submit any fake educational certificate and other
certificate for the purpose of appointment,
To consume narcotic substance or liquor during the working hours
or come to the workplace upon consuming the same,
To get punished for more than two times for the misconduct
pursuant to sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) within a period of three
years,
To commit any misconduct if the prevailing law provides for the
dismissal from service in the case of commission of such
misconduct.
Prohibition of sexual harassment: (1) No person shall commit, or cause to be
committed, any such act, with the exertion of undue influence, as considered to be
sexual harassment under the law in the workplace or in the course of work.
The employer may, depending on the condition and gravity of the
act, impose punishment to the extent of even dismissal from the service on the
labour who commits sexual harassment.
Where the employer or chief executive of any enterprise commits
sexual harassment, the trade union, victim or any member of his or her family may
file a complaint in accordance with the law.
Provisions relating to misconduct may be made in the bye-law: (1) Where
specific punishment for specific type of misconduct has been prescribed by the
respective regulatory bodies regulating banks or financial institutions, schools,
telecom service providers, hospitals, air services, insurance services or enterprises
of specific nature, provisions may be made in the bye-laws accordingly.
Provisions may be made in the bye-law of an enterprise for dismissal
from the service as per the collective agreement or with the approval of the
Department in the event of commission of misconduct of a serious nature.
Power to suspend: (1) Where any labour is detained in accordance with law, such
a labour shall ipso facto be suspended during that period and shall not be entitled
to remuneration for that period.
Provided that if a labour who is detained upon a complaint filed by the
employer himself or herself is proved to be innocent, he or she shall be entitled to
the full remuneration for that period.
Except in the cases referred to in sub-section (1), if it does not
appear appropriate to keep on engaging in work a labour for whom the punishment
referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 131 has been proposed or if there is a
possibility that he or she may destroy the evidence relating to the charge made
against him or her or obstruct the investigation, the employer may suspend such a
labour.
While suspending any labour pursuant to sub-section (2), he or she
may not be suspended generally for more than three months.
Provided that the period of suspension may be extended by a maximum of
one month if the investigation is not completed.
The labour shall be entitled to half the remuneration during the
period of suspension referred to in sub-section (2).
Where a labour who has been suspended pursuant to sub-section (2)
is acquitted of the allegation made against him or her, he or she shall be entitled
to all such remuneration, and increment in salary if any, receivable by him or her
that remains after deducting the amount of remuneration which he or she has
received during the period of suspension.
Except where any labour is held in detention upon first information
report or complaint by the employer himself or herself, the employer may
terminate the service of such a labour if the period of suspension referred to in
sub-section (1) exceeds ninety days. The opportunity hearing need not be given to
the concerned labour while so terminating the service.
Opportunity to be given to submit clarification: Prior to imposing punishment
on any labour for misconduct, the authority imposing punishment shall provide
such a labour with a notice giving opportunity to submit clarification within a
period of seven days, and such a notice shall clearly state also the facts of
commission of the misconduct and possible punishment imposable if it is proved.
Authority imposing punishment: (1) The power to impose punishment for
misconduct shall be vested in its chief executive in the case of an enterprise.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if the byelaw empowers any managerial level labour to take final decision concerning the
punishment imposable for any misconduct, such an authority shall have power to
investigate and impose punishment.
Period for taking decision: (1) Where any labour is found to have committed
misconduct, it is necessary to commence action within two months from the date
of knowledge of the commission of such misconduct.
A decision shall be taken within three months from the date of
commencement of the action pursuant to sub-section (1).
Punishment may be remitted: (1) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be
deemed to bar the imposing of lesser punishment on any labour by proposing
higher punishment.
Where any enterprise has made a bye-law providing for lesser
punishment than that imposable under this Chapter, the provision of the bye-law
shall apply to the labours of such an enterprise.

Chapter-21
Provisions Relating to Termination of Employment
Security of employment: (1) Employment of any labour shall not be terminated
in any condition except in accordance with this Act and the rules or bye-law
framed under this Act.
Proper and sufficient reason shall be given when terminating the
employment.
Termination of time-based and work-based employment: Employment of a
labour engaged in a time-based or work-based employment shall be terminated in
the following circumstance:
After the expiry of the time specified in the employment contract,
in the case of the labour engaged in the time-based employment,
Provided that if the labour is in project-based employment
and the period is extended or the period for the completion of such
a work is extended on the basis of the nature of the work, the
employment shall not terminate until that period.
After the completion of the work specified in the employment
contract in the case of a labour who is in work-based employment,
Provided that if the labour is in project-based employment
and the work is added or the period for the completion of such a
work is extended on the basis of the nature of the work, the
employment shall not terminate until that work remains.
In the case of a labour in casual employment, at the will of the
employer or labour.
Employment may be terminated voluntarily: (1) Any labour may, by submitting
resignation in writing to the employer, terminate the employment.
The employer shall accept the resignation submitted pursuant to
sub-section (1) within fifteen days and give information thereof to the labour.
Where the employer does not accept the resignation within the timelimit referred to in sub-section (2), such resignation shall be deemed to have been
accepted ipso facto from the day following the day on which the time-limit expires.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
resignation submitted by a labour may be cancelled through mutual consent
between the employer and the labour.
If the labour continues working in the same enterprise even after the
day on which his or her resignation is accepted and becomes effective, his or her
resignation shall be deemed to have been cancelled.
Employment may be terminated on the ground of incompetence: (1) If, while
evaluating the work performance of any labour pursuant to the provisions set forth
in this Act or the rules and bye-law framed under this Act, the work performance
of such a labour is found unsatisfactory or poor for three or more than three
consecutive years, the employer may terminate the employment of such a labour.
Prior to terminating the employment pursuant to sub-section (1), the
work performance evaluation must have been made as set forth in this Act or the
rules and bye-law framed under this Act.
Prior to terminating the employment of any labour pursuant to this
Section, the employer of any enterprise employing ten or more labours shall give
a period of at least seven days to the concerned labour for clarification.
Employment may be terminated on the ground of health: (1) Where any labour
becomes incapable of working as a result of physical or mental incapacitation or
grievous hurt or injury or it affects the work because of a long time required for
medical treatment, the employer may, on the basis of recommendation by a
medical doctor, terminate the employment of such a labour.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the
employment of any labour may not be terminated during the period he or she is
undergoing treatment in a hospital because of any accident or occupational disease
while performing the work specified by the employer or until one year from the
date of commencement of his or her treatment at home if he or she is undergoing
treatment at home, and the employer shall provide full remuneration during such
a period.
Provided that the employer shall not be required to provide remuneration
if the labour is entitled to receive the remuneration facility from the Social
Security Fund for the period of treatment.
In the case of a labour who is not able to attend the work of the
enterprise on the ground of medical treatment in the circumstance other than that
set forth in sub-section (2), the employment of such a labour may not be terminated
until six months.
Provided that this sub-section shall not be deemed to bar the removal from
the service prior to that period if there is a clear recommendation by a medical
doctor to the effect that the labour cannot return to the work.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in cases
where the labour who is physically incapacitated or has sustained grievous hurt or
injury can be engaged in any work suitable to the condition of his or her health,
the employer shall engage such a labour in work.
Notice to be given: (1) Prior to terminating the employment relation in any
circumstance except when employment is terminated upon action taken for
misconduct, the employer or labour shall give a notice as follows to each other:
Prior to at least one day, in the case of employment for a maximum
of four weeks,
Prior to at least seven days, in the case of employment for a period
of four weeks to one year, and
Prior to at least thirty days, in the case of employment for a period
of more than one year.
Where the employer terminates employment without giving the
notice referred to in sub-section (1), the employer shall pay the amount equal to
the remuneration for the period requiring the notice to be given to the concerned
labour.
Where the labour terminates employment without giving a notice to
the employer pursuant to sub-section (1), the employer may deduct the amount
equal to the remuneration for the period requiring the notice to be so given from
the remuneration payable to the concerned labour.
Retrenchment may be made: (1) Where an enterprise faces financial problems
in its operation or the labours become redundant because of the merger of more
than one enterprises or the enterprise needs to be closed down partially or
completely because of any other reason, the employer may retrench the number of
labours.
When retrenching the labours pursuant to sub-section (1), the
employer shall, in advance of at least thirty days before the date for retrenchment,
give a notice, setting out the reason requiring retrenchment, possible date for
retrenchment and probable number of labours to be retrenched to the Office and
the authorised trade union, if any, of the enterprise or in the absence of such a
union, to any trade union which is active in the enterprise or the labour relation
committee.
After giving the notice pursuant to sub Section (1), the employer
shall hold discussion with the concerned trade union or the labour relation
committee on the matters concerning the alternatives to the retrenchment of
labours and the grounds and conditions for the selection of the labours for
retrenchment, and the labours may be retrenched as per the agreement reached
upon the discussion.
Where the trade union or the labour relation committee does not
want to hold discussion pursuant to sub-section (3) or no agreement is reached
upon the discussion, the employer may, by giving information of that matter to the
Office, retrench the labours.
While retrenching the labours pursuant to this Section, retrenchment
shall be made generally in the following order:
foreign labours,
those labours who have been awarded more punishments
comparatively for misconduct,
labours whose standard of work performance is rather weak,
labours who have been appointed at the last out of the labours
engaged in the same type of work.
Provided that if it is necessary to retrench the labours
who were appointed earlier, instead of making retrenchment
in the order so specified as to retrench those who have been
appointed at the last, retrenchment may be made by setting
out the reason for the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), except as
otherwise agreed with the trade union, the office-bearers of the collective
bargaining committee or the authorized trade union shall be retrenched last in the
order of priority.
While retrenching the number of labours, the employer shall pay a
lump sum amount to be set by calculating at the rate of one month’s basic
remuneration for each year of his or her service as compensation to a labour who
has completed the service period of at least one year.
Provided that if the service period is less than one year, he or she shall get
the compensation proportionately.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), the labour
who is entitled to the unemployment allowance under the social security laws shall
not receive the compensation pursuant to sub-section (7).
Where any enterprise is required to close down the whole or any
part of the enterprise in pursuance of the order of the Government of Nepal or
Labour Court in accordance with law or any enterprise in the special economic
zone is required to retrench its labours, the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2), (3)
and (4) shall not be applicable.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, the
provision contained in this Section shall not be applicable to any employer who
employs ten or less than ten labours and makes retrenchment of labours.
Resumption of operation: (1) Where, for any reason, the retrenchment of its
labours has been made but the enterprise resumes its operation within two years
or needs to supply additional labours, the preference for employment shall be
given to the labours retrenched pursuant to Section 145.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any other
persons may be employed if the labour who has been retrenched fail to appear in
spite of the notice given to him or her as prescribed.
Where the employer does not give notice or does not employ, the
concerned labour may, not later than thirty-five days, make an application to the
Labour Court.
Other provisions relating to this matter shall be as prescribed.
Compulsory retirement: Any labour who is in regular employment shall get
compulsory retirement after completing the age of fifty-eight years.
Provided that if there is a need to make compulsory retirement at an age
below the age of fifty-eight years for the work of a particular nature, provision to
that effect may be made in the bye-law by obtaining approval from the Council as
prescribed.
Payment of benefits: (1) In the case of an employee of which employment is
terminated because of misconduct or in any other manner whatsoever, the
employer shall pay all amounts including the remuneration, benefits receivable by
him or her at the time of such termination to the labour, not later than fifteen days
of the termination of employment.
The employer shall extend necessary assistance in the provision of
such amount or benefits that is receivable by the labour from the Social Security
Fund, insurance or other body.
In the case of failure to pay such remuneration or benefits that is
receivable by the labour within the period referred to in sub-section (1) or to
extend assistance pursuant to sub-section (2), remuneration shall be paid to such
a labour until the amount is paid as if he or she were in the service.
Where the labour does not appear to receive the remuneration or
benefits, the employer may make payment to the labour’s account or deposit the
same with the Office, directly.
Other provisions relating to the deposit and payment of the amount
referred to in sub-section (4) shall be as prescribed.
Labours to get first priority: Notwithstanding anything contained in other
prevailing law, in case of closure or liquidation of any enterprise, the remuneration
or other benefits due and payable to the labours shall be paid with first priority.
Provided that where the insolvency law is applicable, it shall be dealt with
accordingly.
To issue the certificate of experience: Where the labour whose employment has
been terminated requests for the certificate of experience, the employer shall give
the certificate of work experience, stating, inter alia, the period of service and post
of such a labour.

Chapter-22
Provisions Relating to Labour Court
Formation of Labour Court: (1) The Government of Nepal shall, by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette, form a required number of labour courts.
The jurisdiction and seat of the Labour Court to be formed pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as specified in the same notice.
The Labour Court shall consist of one chairperson and two
members.
Any sitting judge of the High Court or any person having the
qualification of becoming a Judge of the High Court shall be qualified to be the
chairperson or member of the Labour Court.
Except when a sitting judge of the High Court is appointed, the
tenure of the chairperson and members of the Labour Court shall be four years.
The conditions of service and facilities of the chairperson and
members of the Labour Court shall be the same as that of the Judges of the High
Court.
Majority decision to prevail: (1) The chairperson and members shall collectively
exercise the jurisdiction of the Labour Court.
Provided that where the chairperson or any one member is absent, even the
bench of two members may try and adjudicate cases.
A decision of majority of members shall be deemed to be a decision
of the Labour Court.
If the two members constituting the bench hold different opinions,
such opinions shall be submitted to the third member, and the opinion concurred
by the third member shall be deemed to be a decision of the Labour Court. If the
chairperson and member hold different opinions, the opinion of the chairperson
shall be deemed to be a decision of the Labour Court.
Powers of Labour Court: The Labour Court may, in the course of deciding a
case, exercise the following powers, in addition to the powers set forth in this Act
or the rules framed under this Act:
To examine witness, evidence,
To take the defendant’s statement equal to the note of defence, as
per necessity,
To order any party who is not made party or opponent in the case,
on the basis of application by such party or of the nature of the case,
to appear in the course of hearing, and set as a party to the case if
so required,
To inspect any place or workplace related to the dispute,
If the application made by any party to the case submitting that it is
necessary to defer the case until any case sub-judice in the Labour
Court is finally settled or to continue the same appears to be
reasonable, notwithstanding the state of the case, to issue an
interlocutory order to any party to the case to stop any act for a
certain time or give continuity to any act being carried out, with or
without fixing a period,
To uphold, withhold or alter any direction, decision or order given
by the Office or the employer,
The Labour Court shall, in holding the proceeding of and
adjudicating the case, have the powers as mentioned in the case of
the matters set forth in this Act or the rules framed under this Act,
and the same powers as the District Court may exercise, in the case
of the other matters..
Proceeding against contempt of court: (1) The Labour Court may institute
proceeding for its contempt.
Where an act of contempt is established in the proceeding instituted
pursuant to sub Section (1), the Labour Court may impose punishment of a fine
not exceeding ten thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months or both on the offender.
Provided that if the offender begs pardon to the satisfaction of the Labour
Court, the Labour Court may forgive him or her or absolve him or her of the
punishment if already determined or reduce such punishment or order not to
execute the punishment subject to the compliance with such conditions as
specified by the Labour Court, after deferring the punishment on such conditions.
Power to demand bank guarantee or deposit: If there is a possibility that one
party will be entitled to receive any amount from the other party when the case
running under this Act is adjudged and there is a likelihood of non-payment of
such amount by such a party, the Labour Court may, for the execution of the
decision, require such a party to deposit the amount equivalent to that amount or
furnish a bank guarantee covering that amount.
Power to order payment of interest: (1) Where judgment is made holding any
party to the case liable to pay compensation or any other cash to the other party,
payment of such compensation or cash shall be made not later than two months of
the date of receipt of notice of the judgment or decision.
In the event of failure to pay such compensation or cash within the
period referred to in sub-section (1), an interest on such compensation or cash to
be set by fifteen percent thereof shall be paid or recovered with effect from the
date of judgment in the case.
Case may be compromised: (1) Notwithstanding the state of the proceeding of a
case running in the Labour Court under this Act, the Labour Court may, on the
basis of the application made by the concerned party, give permission to
compromise or defer or withdraw such a case.
When compromising or deferring or withdrawing the case pursuant
to sub-section (1), no fine, royalty or fee of any kind shall be charged.
High Court to perform functions of Labour Court: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the Government of Nepal may, by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette, assign the functions of the Labour Court to any
High Court upon specifying its jurisdiction.
The High Court assigned pursuant to sub-section (1) may exercise
all such powers as may be exercisable by the Labour Court pursuant to this Chapter
while trying and adjudicating the case.
To forward the matter to the body having jurisdiction: In making a decision
on a case filed in the Labour Court or the Office pursuant to this Act or the
prevailing law that it has no jurisdiction, the Labour Court or Office shall appoint
the date for appearance and send the parties, along with its case-file, to the
concerned competent body for a decision.
Procedures of the cases: Other provisions relating to the procedures of the cases
to be filed in the Labour Court shall be as prescribed.
Appeal to the Supreme Court: (1) Any party who is dissatisfied with the order
or judgment made by the Labour Court in a case originally tried and adjudicated
by the Labour Court may make an appeal to the Supreme Court within thirty-five
days of the date of knowledge of such an order or judgment.
Any decision made on appeal by the Labour Court shall be final.

Chapter-23
Provisions Relating to Complaint, Punishment and Appeal
Right to make complaint: Where any person, employer, labour or office-bearer
acts in violation of this Act or the rules framed under this Act, the party who is
aggrieved by such act or the concerned trade union with the written consent of the
aggrieved party may make a complaint to the authority competent to make a
decision pursuant to Section 163 or 164, not later than six months from the date
of commission of such act.
Power of the Department or Office to decide: (1) The Department may conduct
necessary inquiry into a complaint made on any of the following matters and do
as follows:
To issue necessary order subject to this Act and impose a fine not
exceeding two hundred thousand rupees on any person that supplies
labours without obtaining any license pursuant to this Act and any
person that hires and employs labours through such a labour
supplier,
To impose, on the basis of the number of such labours, a fine not
exceeding two hundred thousand rupees on any person who employs
a foreigner without obtaining the labour permit pursuant to this Act,
and an additional fine at the rate of five thousand rupees per person
per month in case such a person continues to employ such a
foreigner in spite of the punishment so imposed,
To issue an order to maintain equality by imposing a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees on any person who
discriminates labours at the time of employing or during
employment contrary to Chapter 2,
To order a person who employs a labour without giving an
appointment letter or without entering into an employment contract,
to give an appoint letter or to enter into an employment contract
upon imposing on such a person a fine not exceeding five hundred
thousand rupees at the rate of ten thousand rupees per labour,
To take departmental action pursuant to the prevailing law against
any inspector who causes loss or damage by committing any act
recklessly or with ulterior motive pursuant to Chapter 15,
To give necessary order in case any person exercises any unfair
labour practice or makes transfer contrary to this Act to the
detriment of the labour or performs any act, action relating to
promotion contrary to the bye-law of the enterprise,
To give necessary direction to the concerned Office in case it does
not perform any act, action required to be performed by it within a
certain period, pursuant to this Act and the rules framed under this
Act, even within thirty days of the expiry of that period,
To do necessary work for the settlement of a dispute, if any, arising
between a labour supplier and a main employer as to the
remuneration and benefits to be provided to labours.
The Office may make necessary inquiry into an application made on
any of the following matters and do as follows:
To require the employer who employs a labour by paying
remuneration below the minimum remuneration or deducts
remuneration or benefits contrary to this Act or the rules framed
under this Act to pay the deducted amount and a compensation not
exceeding two times of such amount to the concerned labour,
To impose a fine not exceeding twenty thousand rupees on any
employer, labour or other person who hinders a government
employee in the course of performance of his or her duties or submit
false description or makes false statement or exerts or attempts to
exert undue influence in any way,
To impose a fine at the rate of ten thousand rupees per apprentice or
trainee on an employer who engages any person as an apprentice or
trainee contrary to this Act, issue an order to employ such an
apprentice or trainee on regular employment and to pay the
remuneration and benefits accordingly,
To order recovering such compensation and damages that is two
times higher than the compensation from the employer who does not
deposit such amount of gratuity and of provident fund or contribute
such amount to the social security fund as may be receivable by the
labour pursuant to this Act or the rules framed under this Act or pay
medical expenses or make insurance for compensation,
To give direction to the employer who makes retrenchment contrary
to this Act or in a discriminatory manner to refrain from doing so,
To give necessary direction to the employer who terminates the
employment or prevents any labour from attending the work
contrary to this Act or the rules or bye-law framed under this Act.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, nothing
shall be deemed to bar the making of an application by any labour to the employee
to pursue the personal dispute settlement process and settle the dispute
accordingly.
Any complaint made to the Department or the Office shall be
proceeded with and settled as prescribed.
Decision may be made by the Labour Court: (1) If any person engages any one
in forced labour, the Labour Court may punish such a person with imprisonment
for a term not exceeding two years or a fine not exceeding five hundred thousand
rupees or both and require such person to pay remuneration, allowance and
benefits including damages that is two times of such amount to the labour.
Provided that if any person takes another person outside Nepal and engages
him or her in forced labour, it shall also order the recovery of expenses incurred
in bringing that other person into Nepal.
If any person dies or suffers grievous hurt as a result of violation,
knowingly or recklessly, of any provision relating to occupational safety and
health set forth in this Act or the rules framed under this Act or any person dies as
or gets any of his or her bodily organ disabled or his or her physical or mental
state becomes adversely affected a result of infection of occupational disease
caused as a result of performance or non-performance of any act or any part of the
body becomes disabled or physical or mental state, the person who commits such
act shall be liable to the punishment, if any, provided for in the prevailing law and,
failing such provision, to the punishment of imprisonment for a term not exceeding
two years, and the Labour Court may require such person to pay appropriate
compensation to the aggrieved person.
Where a body corporate commits any offence punishable under this
Act, such body shall be punished with the fine, and if imprisonment is also
imposable for such offence, the chief executive of such body shall be imprisoned
accordingly.
Appeal: (1) Any person who is not satisfied with any order or decision made by
the Department or Office in accordance with this Act or the rules framed under
this Act may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thirty-five days.
Any labour who is not satisfied with any decision made by the
employer to terminate employment or with punishment imposed with respect to
misconduct may make an appeal to the Labour Court within thirty-five days of the
date of receipt of a notice of that decision or punishment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), nothing
shall be deemed to bar the making of appeal accordingly if the bye-law of any
enterprise provides for internal appeal.
The aggrieved party may make an appeal to the Labour Court within
thirty-five days of the date of receipt of a notice of the decision made by the appeal
hearing body or of the date of sixty days of the date on which appeal was made if
such party does not receive a notice about the decision on appeal within that
period.
Decisions to be executed: (1) After a decision or judgment made by the Labour
Court pursuant to this Act has become final or the limitation for making appeal
has expired, the concerned party shall execute such decision or judgment.
The concerned party shall execute, in good faith, any agreement
reached in respect of an individual or collective claim between a labour or trade
union and the employer bilaterally or before the Office or any other body or
authority or any arbitral award.
Where the concerned party fails to execute the agreement or
decision pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the other party may on his or her own
or through the trade union or employers’ association make an application to the
Office for that purpose.
On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-section (3), the Office
shall write to the concerned employer or labour for the execution of such
agreement, decision or judgment.
If so asked pursuant to sub-section (4), the concerned employer or
labour shall execute such an agreement, decision or judgment within fifteen days
from the date of receipt of such direction.
Power of the Office to have execution of decisions: (1) Where the decision,
judgment or agreement is not executed pursuant to Section 166, the concerned
party may make an application to the Office.
On receipt of the application pursuant to sub-section (1), the Office
may cause such a decision, judgment or agreement to be executed by adopting any
or all of the following measures vis-à-vis the employer, enterprise or labour who
has to execute such decision, judgment or agreement:
To send a request to the concerned body or authority to withhold
any immovable property or auction the property,
To send a request to freeze a bank account,
To send a request for the suspension or withholding of such
concessions or facilities as may be enjoyable pursuant to the
prevailing law,
To suspend the labour permit or license of the concerned party,
To make any other appropriate order.
If so requested by the Office to do any act referred to in sub-section
(2), the concerned body shall do accordingly.
If the decision or judgment is not executed within three months from
the date when the application was made pursuant to sub-section (1) or within
fifteen days of the completion of the process referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3)
or such a decision or judgment is challenged legally, a complaint may be made in
the Labour Court for punishment pursuant to Section 168.
Power to impose punishment in the event of non-execution of judgment,
compromise or agreement: (1) The Labour Court shall give a notice prescribing
the time limit to the concerned party for the execution of any judgment on labour
related matters made by the Labour Court or the Supreme Court.
The Labour Court may impose the punishment with a fine not
exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding one year on any employer or labour who fails to execute or delays or
lingers the implementation of the order given by the Office for the execution of
the order, judgment made by the Labour Court or arbitral award or understanding
or agreement entered into between the employer and the labour pursuant to this
Provided that if the order, judgment, compromise, agreement or
understanding is executed within the period prescribed by the Labour Court, the
Labour Court may annul such punishment or give partial or full exemption from
the enforcement of such punishment if already sentenced.

Chapter-24
Miscellaneous
Procedure relating to service of notice: (1) A process or notice sent by the
employer to the labour or vice versa shall immediately be acknowledged and a
receipt of such acknowledgment, provided.
Where a process or notice could not be served in accordance with
sub-section (1), such a process or notice shall be deemed to have been received by
the concerned party if it is sent by registered courier or post to his or her address,
with one copy thereof being posted at the workplace, and a memorandum being
executed in witness of three persons, and information thereof is given to the
Office.
Provided that in the case of the application or notice given by the labour, it
is not required to post it at the workplace.
Where any one refuses to accept such a process or notice, it may be
sent through fax or email or other electronic means of communication to him or
her. If so sent, such a process or notice shall be deemed to have been served except
as otherwise proved.
Where, in the case of any matter required to be informed by the
employer collectively, such information shall be deemed to have been received by
all the labours if the notice thereof is posted on the notice board of the workplace
and written information thereof is given to the trade unions active in the enterprise.
Fixation of basic remuneration: (1) The basic remuneration of the labour on
task-based employment shall be determined as prescribed.
Provided that if not so determined, the minimum remuneration fixed for the
labours shall be regarded as the basic remuneration.
In the case of labours on piece rate work, the rate of wage per piece
shall be determined as prescribed on the basis of the minimum remuneration fixed
pursuant to this Act.
Special provisions relating to managers and managerial level labours: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, nothing contained in
this Act shall be deemed to bar the hiring of a managerial level labour working in
the capacity of chief executive on time based employment, fixing of terms and
benefits of service and termination of his or her service.
The managers and managerial level labours are not allowed to
submit collective demands or take part in collective bargaining or in a strike, on
behalf of any trade union.
Entitlement to remuneration and other benefits: (1) Where a labour who is
terminated from the employment is reinstated in employment by an order or
decision of the Office or Department or Labour Court, such labour shall be entitled
to receive the remuneration and other benefits from the employer for the period
from the date of termination to the date of reinstatement.
Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to bar the making of
judgment enabling the labour to receive a reasonable amount as compensation in
addition to the amount referred to in sub-section (1) from the employer, instead of
reinstating such labour on the basis of the merits of the case.
Increment of insurance amount: On recommendation of the Council, the
Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, periodically
increase the medical insurance and accidental insurance amount specified in this
Delegation of authority: The Ministry or Department or Office may so delegate
any or all of the powers conferred on it by this Act that such power is exercisable
by any office or officer. If such delegation is made, a notice thereof shall be
published in the Nepal Gazette.
Saving of acts done in good faith: No action shall be instituted against any labour
inspector, occupational safety and health inspector or any officer or employer or
labour deputed in inspection for the loss or damage, if any, caused to any person
as a result of any act done or attempted to be done in good faith in the course of
performing his or her duties.
Provided that such person shall be personally liable with respect to any act
done knowingly or with bad intention.
Special powers of the Ministry: If information is received that the party is
compelled to suffer harassment because of failure to decide any application made
to the Office or Department for a long time, except for the matter which is sub
judice in the Labour Court under this Act or if it seems appropriate that such
application is to be proceeded with by the Ministry because of the subject matter
contained in the application being complex, nothing contained elsewhere in this
Act shall be deemed to bar the Ministry form examining and deciding such
application. The decision so made shall be deemed to be a decision made by the
body of first instance, and the party who is not satisfied with such decision may
make an appeal to the Labour Court.
Labour coordination committee: (1) There shall be a central level labour
coordination committee consisting of such members as prescribed, under the
chairpersonship of the Director General of the Department.
The functions, duties and powers of the committee shall be as
prescribed
Transitional provisions: (1) The labours engaged in permanent service at the time
of commencement of this Act shall ipso facto be deemed to be the labours in
regular employment pursuant to this Act.
The labours employed on contract, daily wage basis or otherwise at
the time of commencement of this Act shall be required to make the employment
contract pursuant to Chapter 3. Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to
bar the making of adjustment of the remuneration and benefits receivable at the
time of making such employment contract to the provident fund amount and other
benefits payable pursuant to this Act not later than three months of the
commencement of this Act.
Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to be prejudicial to
the conditions of service and benefits of any labour who is receiving the benefits
in excess of that set forth in the Act under the prevailing law or collective
agreement at the time of the commencement of this Act.
For the purpose of sub-section (3), the benefits that remain after
paying the benefits specified in the Act to the prescribed body shall be provided
by adjusting the same in other headings.
Where any judgment made by the Office, Labour Court or other
court under the Labour Act, 1992 (2048) and Trade Union Act, 1992 (2049) before
the commencement of this Act has not been executed and an application is made
within one year of the date of the commencement of this Act, such a judgment,
decision or order shall be executed or caused to be executed as if it were made in
accordance with this Act.
The welfare fund established under Section 37 of the Labour Act,
1992 (2048) and Section 13 of the Bonus Act, 1974 (2030) shall continue its
operation until a separate law relating to social security is made.
The Court in existence at the time of the commencement of this Act
shall exist until the formation of the court pursuant to this Act.
This Act to prevail: The matters contained in this Act and the rules framed under
this Act shall be governed by this Act and Regulation and the other matters, by the
prevailing laws.
This Act not to apply: (1) The following matters shall be governed as follows:
This Act shall not apply to the Nepal army, Nepal Police, Armed
Police Force and National Investigation.
The prevailing law relating to civil service shall apply in the case of
the civil service.
Where the prevailing law provides for the conditions and benefits
of service in relation to the service established under a special law and the special
economic zone, such service shall be governed accordingly.
Where the prevailing law has no provision in relation to the
remuneration, conditions and benefits of service of any labour, the provisions of
this Act shall ipso facto apply in the case of the remuneration, conditions and
benefits of service of such labour.
When making any decision, order or judgment that this Act will not
apply to any labour, such decision, order or judgment shall be made setting out,
inter alia, which law provides for the rights and benefits conferred by this Act in
the case of such labour.
Where the employer of an enterprise to which the Working
Journalists Act, 2051 applies executes the employment contract pursuant to this
Act or any agreement thereby making applicable the provisions of this Act
between the employer and the labour of such enterprise, this Act shall also apply
to such labour.
To frame and implement directives and procedures: (1) The Ministry may, for
the purpose of implementation of this Act or the rules framed under this Act, frame
and implement necessary directives and procedures.
Employers' commodities associations or federations and trade union
associations or federations may frame and implement codes of good labour
practice on policy matters relating to the labour.
Powers to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules
for the implementation of this Act.
When framing rules pursuant to sub-section (1), separate rules may
be framed in the case of businesses, services and industries of special nature or of
the informal sector.
Repeal and saving: (1) The following Acts have been repealed:
The Labour Act, 1992 (2048),
The Industrial Apprenticeship and Training Act, 1983 (2039),
The Retirement Fund Act, 1986 (2042).
The cases filed and sub judice under the Acts set forth in sub-section
(1) shall be transferred to the Labour Court.
Any acts and actions performed under the Acts set forth in subsection (1) shall be deemed to have been performed under this Act.

===== SOURCE: Tourism-Act-(2035).pdf =====

Tourism Act, 2035 (1978)
Date of Authentication and
Publication
2035.7.8 (Oct. 25 1978)
Amendments
1. Tourism (First Amendment) Act, 2042 (1985)
2042.7.14 (Oct. 30, 1985)
2. Administration of Justice Act, 2048 (1991)
2048.2.16 (May 30, 1991)
3. Tourism (Second Amendment) Act, 2053 (1997)
2053.10.23 (Feb. 5, 1997)
4. Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2063
Act No. 27 of the year 2035 (1978)
An Act Made relating to Tourism Arrangement
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary arrangement of health, facility
and interest of tourists and Nepalese tourist who visit one place to another place of
Nepal and to make economic interest of general people through tourism development,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by His Majesty King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah
Dev with the aid and advise of the Rastriya Panchayat.
Short title, extent and commencement: (1) This Act may be called as
"Tourism Act, 2035 (1978)".
(2) This Act shall extend all over Nepal.
(3) The Chapters other than Chapter 4 of this Act shall come into force
immediately and Chapter 4 shall come into force on such date as Government
By the Notification Ministry of Tourism and Civil Aviation of dated on 2055.8.14 in Nepal Gazette Second
Amendment came into force from 2055.9.17
 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
of Nepal may appoint by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette.
Definitions: In this Act, unless the subject or content requires,-
 (a) "Tourist" means a Non-Nepalese citizen who enters into Nepal from
abroad for the purpose of a visit.
(a1) "Nepalese Tourist" means Nepalese citizens who visit from one place to
another place of Nepal.
"Travel Agency" means a person, firm or company operated in
whatsoever name who manages for traveling, accommodation and sight
seen upon charging cost to the tourist and other person where the
facility of modern vehicle is available.
(c) Trekking Agency" means person, firm or company operated in
whatsoever name managing for sight seen of various natural and
cultural places for tourist and other persons upon charging cost in such
places where normally modern vehicle is not available.
"Expedition/Mountaineering" means climbing the peak of the mountain
by the expedition team with the purpose of approaching the Peak of
Nepalese Mountain of the Himalayan Range.
"Base Camp" means the camp located in the lowest height which can
be approached without using any specific technology related to the
 Chapter 4 of this Act came into force, with an immediate effect, by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette,
dated on 2036.7.26
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the First Amendment.
 Inserted by the First Amendment.
mountaineering and where the goods, food, medicine etc. to be used for
the mountaineering expedition are stored and supplied for the next camp
and which is used to provide direction about mountaineering expedition.
"Liaison Officer" means the officer deputed by the Government of
Nepal pursuant to Section 20 accompanied with the mountaineering
team.
"Sardar" means the head of the workers who manages the local worker
and regulates (controls) mountain guide or high altitude worker and
base camp worker.
"Mountain Guide" means the person who has to help or assist to the
climbers above the base camp.
"High Altitude Worker" means the worker who transports essential
goods to and from, above the base camp.
"Local Worker" means Porter who transports goods to and from the
base camp.
"Worker of the Base Camp" means the cook, messenger and a person
who performs other similar work in the base camp for the expedition
team.
"Mountaineering Association" means the Mountaineering Association
registered as per prevailing law and recognized by the Government of
Nepal for mountaineering purpose pursuant to Section 37.
"Tourist Guide" means a person who holds a license pursuant to Section
 Amended by the First Amendment.
39 ......... to work as tourist guide with the tourist upon charging
remuneration.
................
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in this
Act or in the Rules framed there under.

Chapter 2
Provision Relating to Travel and Trekking Agency
License to be obtained to work as a Travel and Trekking Agency: (1) A
person, who is interested to operate the Travel and Trekking Agency shall have
to obtain a license pursuant to this Act.
(2) A person, who is interested to obtain a license for Travel or
Trekking Agency, shall submit an application to the Government of Nepal
along with the prescribed details.
(3) Upon receiving an application pursuant to Sub-section (2),
Government of Nepal upon conducting necessary inquiry, may issue license as
prescribed to the applicant if finds capable to operate Travel or Trekking
Agency upon charging the prescribed fees.
(4) The license issued pursuant to Sub-section (3) shall be renewed
within the prescribed time upon submitting the prescribed fees.
 Deleted by the First Amendment.
Deleted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
3A. Classification of Travel or Trekking Agency: (1) The classification of Travel
or Trekking Agency shall be as prescribed.
(2) The Government of Nepal may provide facility to the Travel or
Trekking Agency so classified pursuant to Sub-section (1).
Disqualification: A license pursuant to Section 2 shall not be issued to the
following persons:
A person who is not competent to enter into contract pursuant to
prevailing contract law.
A person who is declared insolvent.
A person whose Travel or Trekking Agency license has been cancelled
pursuant to Section 9 and a period of two years from that date has not
been lapsed.
A person who has been convicted and imposed penalty of imprisonment
by a court in an offense involving moral turpitude.
Notice regarding fees to be given by the Travel or Trekking Agency: (1)
The Travel or Trekking Agency, holding a license pursuant to this Act, shall
provide notice to the Government of Nepal about the rate of the service fees
to be charged to the tourists.
(2) The rate of the fees mentioned in the Notice pursuant to Sub-section
(1) shall be published as determined by Government of Nepal.
 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
 Amended by the First Amendment.
Payment of Bill to be made in the convertible Foreign Currency: (1) A
Travel or Trekking Agency, while providing service pursuant to this Act to the
tourist, shall make transaction for the payment of bill in the convertible
Foreign Currency as determined by Government of Nepal.
(2) All transaction of the foreign currency earned within Nepal or
abroad, pursuant to Sub-section (1), shall be done through Nepal Rastra Bank.
(3) Government of Nepal may conduct an inquiry to check the
transaction pursuant to Sub-section (2) and (3).
Power to Suspend License: (1) Government of Nepal may suspend the
license of a Travel or Trekking Agency upto a period of Six months in the
following conditions:-
If one violates any of the provisions of this Act or Rules
framed there under.
If some one is disqualified pursuant to Clause (b) and (d)
of Section 4.
(2) Before suspending a license of Travel or Trekking Agency of a
person pursuant to Sub-section (1), an opportunity to put his/her defense shall
be provided and at least fifteen days time shall be given for such defense.
 Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
7A. License may be Cancelled: In case a Travel or Trekking Agency suspended
pursuant to Section 7 again commits the similar acts after the expiry of
suspension, Government of Nepal may cancel the license of such Travel or
Trekking Agency as prescribed.
License to be taken by the permitted and operated Trekking Agency: (1) A
person who is operating a Trekking Agency with the approval of the
Government of Nepal before the commencement of this Act, shall submit an
application, within the prescribed time, to the Government of Nepal to obtain a
license pursuant to this Act along with the prescribed details.
(2) Government of Nepal shall issue a trekking agency license to the
person who submits an application within the time frame as mentioned in Subsection (1).
Penalty: (1) In case someone runs (operates) a travel agency or trekking
agency or conducts transaction without opening such agency or attempts for
the same without obtaining a license pursuant to this Act, Government of
Nepal shall cause to close down such agency or transaction and may fine upto
Twenty Thousand Rupees.
(2) In case, some one carries out any function relating to a Travel or
Trekking Agency in the time of suspension of his/her license pursuant to

Section 7, Government of Nepal may fine upto Twenty Thousand Rupees and
cancel the license of such Travel or Trekking Agency.
 Inserted by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
(3) In case, someone violates the provision of Sub-section (1) of

Section 6, Government of Nepal may fine upto Forty Thousand Rupees for
the first time and Eighty Thousand Rupees each time from the second time.
(4) In case, someone gets punishment three or more times pursuant to
the prevailing foreign exchange law for violating Sub-section (2) of Section 6,
Government Nepal may cancel the license of such Travel or Trekking
Agency.
(5) The aggrieved person, by the order made by Government of Nepal
pursuant to this Section, may file a complaint before the Court of Appeal
within thirty-five days.

Chapter-3
Provision relating to tourist standard Hotel, Lodge, Restaurant
or Resort and Bar
Registration as tourist standard : (1) A person, who is interested to register
to his/her hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar as a tourist standard, shall
submit an application to the Government of Nepal in a prescribed format.
(2) In case the hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar so interested to
registered pursuant to Sub-section (1) deserves prescribed facilities it shall be
registered in the tourist standard and in case of hotel it shall be registered in the
prescribed classification of the tourism standard.
(3) The fees for registration of a Hotel, Lodge, Restaurant or Resort and
 Amended by the First Amendment..
 Amended by the Second Amendment..
Bar shall be as prescribed.
Constitution of Standard Fixation Committee: (1) Government of Nepal
may constitute a Standard Fixation Committee for the recommendation of
classification or registration of hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar as a
tourism standard.
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the committee pursuant to Subsection (1) shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
Power of inspection and experiment: (1) Government of Nepal may inspect
or cause to inspect the hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar registered
pursuant to Section 10 and may experiment or cause to experiment the food
and drinks (edibles).
(2) In the course of inspection of the hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort
and bar or experiment of the goods to be used therein, pursuant to Sub-section
(1), are not found up to the prescribed standard, Government of Nepal shall
provide appropriate time to such hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar to
maintain the standard.
(3) In case, one cannot maintain standard even receiving such time
pursuant to Sub-section (2), Government of Nepal, in consultation with the
Standard Fixation Committee pursuant to Section 11, may suspended the
registration or degrade to the appropriate classification to such hotel, lodge,
restaurant or resort and bar.
(4) In case, the hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar so suspended or
degraded pursuant to Sub-section (3) fulfills the prescribed standard,
Government of Nepal may revoke such suspension or may register it as it was
in the previous standard.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (4), in a case of
suspension of registration, if hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar does not
maintain the prescribed standard so fixed in the past within one year from such
suspension, Government of Nepal may revoke the registration pursuant to

Section 10.
Price list to be published: The hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar
registered pursuant to Section 10, shall submit its rate or price list to the
Government of Nepal and make it public and publish as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.
Restriction on hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar: (1) Any hotel,
lodge, restaurant or resort and bar, not registered pursuant to Section 10, shall
not be eligible to perform the following acts:
To use any word or sign in its signboard, advertisement or
transaction to mean such hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort
and bar as of tourist standard or,
To advertise or contact directly to a tourist or travel
agency of abroad for the purpose of accommodation or
food.
(2) The hotel shall not use any word or sign in its signboard,
advertisement or transaction which might give a sense to mean it an upper
level tourist standard hotel than so registered pursuant to Section 10.
Penalty: (1) In case, someone operates a hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and
bar to mean it as a tourist standard without registering it pursuant to Section 10
or uses word or sign or contacts to the tourist by violating Sub-section (1) of

Section 14, Government of Nepal may fine (such person) upto Ten Thousand
Rupees for the first time, from Ten Thousand Rupees upto Thirty Thousand
Rupees for the second time and from Thirty Thousand Rupees upto Fifty
Thousand Rupees for third or more time.
(2) In case, someone uses any word or sign upon violating Sub-section
(2) of Section 14, Government of Nepal may suspend or cancel the registration
of such hotel.
(3) In case, someone causes any hindrance or the obstacle in inspecting
the hotel, lodge, restaurant or resort and bar or experimenting the food or
drinks (edibles) to be used over there, to the personnel deputed by the
Government of Nepal pursuant to Section 12, Government of Nepal may fines
upto Ten Thousand Rupees to such person.
(4) The aggrieved person, by the order made by Government of Nepal
pursuant to Sub-section (1), (2) or (3), may file a complaint before the Court
of Appeal within thirty-five days.

Chapter-4
Provision relating to Mountaineering/ Expedition
Restriction on Climbing Himalayan-Peaks without Permission: No
mountaineering expedition team shall be entitled to climb any Himalayan-Peak
 Amended by the Second Amendment..
without obtaining permission under this Act.
Permission to be taken for Mountaineering: (1) A mountaineering
expedition team, interested to climb any Himalayan-peak of Nepal so
permitted by Government of Nepal for mountaineering, shall submit an
application to Government of Nepal as prescribed.
(2) Upon receiving an application pursuant Sub-section (1), Government
of Nepal may, if it deems reasonable upon conducting necessary inquiry, issue
permit as prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions to be fulfilled by the mountaineering
expedition team, who has obtained permission for mountaineering, shall be as
prescribed.
Royalty to be paid for Mountaineering: (1) The mountaineering expedition
team, who has received permit for mountaineering expedition pursuant to

Section 17, shall pay the prescribed royalty in the convertible foreign
currencies for the prescribed altitude of Himalayan peak.
Provided that, the royalty to be paid by a Nepalese mountaineering
expedition team or by Nepalese side of a joint-mountaineering expedition team
of Nepalese and foreigners, may be paid in Nepalese currency.
(2) The royalty being paid by one mountaineering expedition team shall
not be transferred for any other mountaineering expedition team.
Route for Mountaineering: (1) A mountaineering expedition team shall
strictly follow the route for mountaineering as prescribed in the permit issued
Inserted by the First Amendment..
by Government of Nepal.
(2) A prior approval of Government of Nepal shall be obtained in case
the route of mountaineering is needed to be changed due to natural or any other
reasons.
Provided that, if it is indispensable to change the route from unexpected
(force majore) reasons, the reason thereof shall have to be informed as soon as
possible to Government of Nepal through the Liaison Officer.
Liaison Officer: (1) A Mountaineering expedition team, who has received a
permit for mountaineering expedition, shall have to include Liaison Officer in
such number as Government of Nepal may depute.
Provided that, Government of Nepal may determine Himalayan Peaks,
where it shall no be necessary to include Liaison Officer.
(2) A Mountaineering expedition team shall provide facility to the
Liaison Officer deputed for accompanying with the expedition team pursuant
to Sub-section (1) for the period commencing from the date of departure for
mountaineering expedition to the date of arriving after completion of
mountaineering at Kathmandu or any other place as specified by Government
of Nepal, as prescribed.
(3) The functions, duties and powers of a Liaison Officer shall be as
prescribed.
Provision relating to Sardar, Mountain Guide, Base-Camp Workers, etc.:
(1) A mountaineering expedition team may include Sardar, mountain-guides,
Inserted by the First Amendment..
base-camp-workers,
altitude-workers
local-workers
mountaineering expedition while
departing
mountaineering. The
mountaineering team shall provide facility, to such persons accompanying with
the expedition team for the period commencing from the date of departure for
mountaineering expedition to the date of arriving after completion of
mountaineering at Kathmandu or any other place as specified by Government
of Nepal, as prescribed.
Provided that, the mountaineering expedition team shall include the
workers in a number as prescribed.
(2) Base-camp-workers, altitude-workers or local-workers may be taken
to the expedition on the way if so required after departing for the
mountaineering.
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the Sardars, mountain-guides,
base-camp-workers, altitude-workers and local-workers shall be as prescribed.
To be a Nepalese Citizen: The Sardars, mountain-guides, altitude-workers,
base-camp-workers and local-workers accompanying with mountaineering
expedition team should be the Nepalese citizens.
May be removed from work: (1) The leader of the mountaineering expedition
team may, in consultation with the Liaison Officer, remove any Sardar,
mountain-guide, altitude-worker, base-camp-worker from work in case any of
such person's work is not found satisfactory.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
(1a) If somebody is removed from the work before the completion of
the mountaineering task pursuant to Sub-section (1), the materials received as
facility, other than clothes, shoes etc. use in the body, shall be returned back to
the expedition team.
(2) The mountaineering expedition team shall provide expenses required
for returning from the place of removal of work to the place of employment to
the person as removed under Sub-section (1).
Medical check-up to be conducted: (1) The mountaineering expedition team
shall cause to check-up the health of the members of its team, Liaison Officer,
Sardar, Mountain-guide, Altitude-worker, Base-camp-worker and Local
worker before departing for mountaineering.
(2) A person whose health condition is not found satisfactory while
checking up health pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall not be included into the
mountaineering team.
Personal Accident insurance to be made: (1) The mountaineering expedition
team shall cause to insure a personal Accident insurance to the Liaison
Officers, Sardars, mountain-guides, base-camp-workers and altitude workers
by a prescribed insurer for a prescribed sum, in his/her own cost before
engaging them into the work.
Provided that, the personal accident insurance of local-workers shall not
be compulsory.
(2) If a person, who is to be insured pursuant to Sub-section (1) dies or
 Inserted by the First Amendment.
sustains injury in an accident whilst on his/her duty, before being insured, on
account of engaging him/her on the way or due to any other reason, the
concerned mountaineering expedition team shall make a payment as
compensation to him/her or his/her legal heir an amount of money equal to the
amount as if he/she were insured.
(3) If a Local-worker, whilst on his/her duty, dies of or sustains injury in
an accident, the concerned mountaineering expedition team shall compensate
to him/her or his/her legal heir pursuant to Sub-section (2) even though such
person was not being insured.
Explanation: for the purpose of this Chapter:
"Accident" includes any disease or ailment causing due to snow
or altitude.
"Whilst on his/her duty" includes the period between the date
and place of commitment to engage or employ and the date of
return at the same place after completion of the task.
Agent to be appointed:(1) The mountaineering expedition team, who is
engaged in mountaineering expedition, shall appoint own agent in order to
perform incidental works in Kathmandu and its information shall be provided
to Government of Nepal.
(2) While appointing an agent pursuant to Sub-section (1) a foreign or
joint mountaineering expedition team except the Nepalese mountaineering
expedition team shall appoint a Trekking Agency or any institution arranging
 Inserted by the First Amendment.
mountaineering licensed under this Act.
(3) The functions and duties of the agent appointed pursuant to Subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
Provision regarding with bringing of Equipments and Materials relating
to Mountaineering only: (1) The mountaineering expedition team who has a
permit pursuant of Section 17, shall bring the equipments and other materials
concerned with its expedition, in a required number, into the Nepal after the
prior approval of Government of Nepal.
(2) In case, a Mountaineering expedition team brings any equipment or
other materials by hiding or concealing, without giving information to
Government of Nepal, Government of Nepal may seize equipments or such
materials.
Report regarding Mountaineering to be transmitted: (1) The leader of a
mountaineering expedition team or a member of the team working on his/her
behalf shall transmit periodic reports as prescribed in the period of
mountaineering through the Liaison Officer or directly in case there is no any
Liaison Officer.
(2) The leader of a mountaineering expedition team shall submit a report
as prescribed to Government of Nepal within a prescribed time, after the
completion of its mountaineering expedition.
Emergency Rescue Operation: (1) In case, any person accompanying with
the mountaineering expedition team such as Liaison officer, sardar, mountain-
Inserted by the First Amendment.
 Amended by the First Amendment.
guide, altitude-worker, base-camp-worker, local-worker or a mountaineer is
to be rescued from emergency, rescue-work may be operated through the agent
pursuant to Section 26 or an institution, if any established for rescue-works.
(2) All costs incurred on rescue-works pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall
be borne by the concerned mountaineering expedition team.
29A. To Inform: (1) In case, a member, Liaison Officer, Mountain-guide, altitudeworker, base-camp-worker or local-worker had an accident or killed in an
accident or by any other reason or is lost in the time of mountaineering, a
Liaison Officer accompanying with the mountaineering expedition team or
leader or any member of the such team shall submit a detail report thereof to
Government of Nepal.
(2) Government of Nepal may, on the basis of the report received
pursuant to Sub-section (1), informally inform to the concern person or agency
as to the death or disappearance of such person.
Environment to be kept Unpolluted: (1) A mountaineering expedition team,
shall comply with the prescribed conditions in order to not causing the
environment to be polluted at the time of mountaineering,
(2) In case, any loss or damage to the life of any person or governmental
or non-governmental property is caused by reason of non-complying with the
prescribed
conditions
pursuant
Sub-section
concerned
mountaineering expedition team shall pay the compensation as determined by
 Amended by the First Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Government of Nepal and if such team fails to pay them, the agency which has
recommended such mountaineering expedition team shall have to pay such
compensation.
30A. Deposit may be taken for garbage management: (1) Government of Nepal
may take deposit as prescribed from the mountaineering expedition team of
prescribed Himalayan peak for the garbage management.
(2) The deposit pursuant to Sub-section (1) shall be returned to the
concerned mountaineering expedition team after such team deposits the
prescribed goods in the place so determined by the Government of Nepal upon
completion of such expedition.
(3) The deposit amount shall be transferred to the government account;
if concerned mountaineering expedition team does not deposit the goods
pursuant to Sub-section (2) in the determined place and such goods may be
sent back to the concerned place.
Transmission of News relating to mountaineering: A mountaineering
expedition team shall not transmit elsewhere any news regarding to
mountaineering without giving information to Government of Nepal at the time
of the mountaineering.
Liability and Responsibility of the Leader of the Mountaineering
Expedition Team: (1) A leader of the mountaineering expedition team shall
have main responsibility to cause to fulfill the provisions of this Act, Rules
framed hereunder and the conditions as prescribed in the permit.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
(2) Other functions and duties of the leader of a mountaineering
expedition team, except pursuant to Sub-section (1), shall be as prescribed.
Permission might be revoked or imposed restriction thereon: (1) In case, a
leader or any member of a mountaineering expedition team violates this Act,
Rules framed hereunder or any matter prescribed in conditions of the permit
for mountaineering, Government of Nepal may revoke permit issued under this
Act at any time.
(2) If any special situation arises in order to revoke the permission for
mountaineering issued under this Act, Government of Nepal may revoke such
permission with or without showing reasons thereof at any time.
Abandonment of Mountaineering: A mountaineering expedition team may
abandon its mountaineering expedition at any time.
Royalty not to be refunded: In case, the permission is revoked pursuant to
Sub-section (1) of Section 33 or the expedition is abandoned pursuant to

Section 34, the royalty paid by such mountaineering expedition team shall not
be refunded.
Exemption may be provided for the Mountaineering Expedition Team:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, Government of
Nepal may provide any exemption or facility as prescribed for Nepalese and
prescribed mountaineering expedition team or foreign mountaineering
expedition team which has included Nepalese citizen within it.
Membership of Mountaineering Association to be obtained: (1) Any
Sardar, mountain-guide, altitude-worker or base-camp-worker, who has not
obtained membership of Mountaineering Association, shall not be entitled to
go accompanying with a mountaineering expedition team and the institution
which makes arrangement for mountaineering also shall not be entitled to
make any arrangement without being affiliated with the Mountaineering
Association.
(2) Government of Nepal may delegate power to the Mountaineering
Association for issuing permit of mountaineering expedition on prescribed
Himalayan-peaks.
(3) In case, any permit is issued upon exercising the power delegated
pursuant to Sub-section (2), the Mountaineering Association shall send the
details of such permission within fifteen days from the date of issuance of such
permit to Government of Nepal.
(4) Government of Nepal, may issue necessary orders or directives to
the Mountaineering Association and it shall be the duty of such Association to
abide by such orders or directives.
Penalty: (1) In case, a mountaineering expedition team or its any member
commits any of the following acts, Government of Nepal may ban them from
entering into Nepal for a period upto Five years or ban for mountaineering in
Nepal for a period upto Ten years:-
To scale any Himalayan-peak or attempt to do so without
obtaining permission.
To scale or attempt to do so of any Himalayan-peak which
is not opened for mountaineering.
To commit any immoral conduct or behaviour whilst on
mountaineering period.
On failure to submit the prescribed matters within the
prescribed period which ought to be submitted to
Government of Nepal after completion of mountaineering
expedition.
On failure to comply with the conditions prescribed for
not causing the environment polluted.
Upon violation of the provisions of this Act or Rules
framed thereunder or conditions specified in the permit.
(2) In case, any mountaineering expedition team or its member scales
any Himalayan-peak without obtaining permission, Government of Nepal may,
if it deems appropriate, impose a fine equal to the amount to double of royalty
to be paid for obtaining the permission of mountaineering of such peak, instead
of an action pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) In case, any mountaineering expedition team or its member scales
any Himalayan-peak not opened for mountaineering, Government of Nepal
may, if it deems appropriate, impose a fine equal to the amount of three times
of the royalty to be paid for scaling the highest Himalayan peak opened for
mountaineering instead of an action pursuant to Sub-section (1).
Amended by the First Amendment.
(4) In case, any agency making arrangements for mountaineering
violates any provisions regarding mountaineering of this Act or Rules made
thereunder or instigates others to violate the same, Government of Nepal
may punish either banning such agency from making any types of
arrangement for mountaineering for a period from one year upto Five years or
imposing a fine from Five Thousand Rupees upto Twenty Five Thousand
Rupees or with both.
(5) In case, any mountaineering expedition team does not comply with
the prescribed conditions set forth for not causing the environment to be
polluted, Government of Nepal may, if it deems appropriate, impose a fine of
upto Fifty Thousand Rupees instead of proceeding any action pursuant to
Sub-section (1).
(6) In case, a mountaineering association does not abide by the orders or
directives issued by Government of Nepal pursuant to Sub-section (4) or

Section 37, Government of Nepal may withdraw the power delegated pursuant
to Sub-section (2) of Section 37 or invoke the recognition provided to it for
mountaineering purpose.
(7) In case, someone instigates any mountaineering expedition team or
any of its member to violate this Act or Rules framed thereunder or order or
directives of Government of Nepal, the prescribed authority may punish such
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
person with a fine from One Thousand Rupees upto Ten Thousand Rupees.
(8) The aggrieved person, by the order made by prescribed officer
pursuant to Sub-section (7), may file a complaint before Government of Nepal
within thirty-five days and a decision made by Government of Nepal to this
effect shall be final.

Chapter-5
Provision Relating to Tour Guide
License to be obtained for Tour Guide: (1) A person, who is interested to
work as a tour guide shall have to obtain a license pursuant to this Act,
(2) A person, who is interested to work as Tour Guide shall submit an
application as prescribed to the prescribed officer.
(3) A person, who submits an application pursuant to Sub-section (1),
shall take part in the examination or training and prescribed officer shall
provide license as prescribed to the applicant, who passes such examination or
training upon charging prescribed fees.
Disqualification: The Tour Guide license shall not be provided to the
following persons,-
A person who has been convicted and imposed penalty of imprisonment
by a court in an offense involving moral turpitude.
A person suffering from any mental or communicable diseases.
A person whose Tour Guide license has been cancelled pursuant to
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Clause (a) or (d) of Section 44 and a three years period from that date
has not been lapsed.
Validity Period of the License: (1) The validity period of the license of Tour
Guide shall be of Five years.
(2) The renewal, renewal fees and officer to renew the license of the
Tour Guide shall be as prescribed.
+41A. Classification of Tour Guide: The classification of Tour Guide shall be as
prescribed.
Another License may be obtained in case lost of License: (1) In case, the
Tour Guide license received by someone is lost, he/she shall submit an
application within prescribed time to the prescribed officer for another license.
(2) The prescribed officer pursuant to Sub-section (1) may provide
another license as prescribed upon charging prescribed fees.
Restricted acts for the Tour Guide: The Following acts shall not be carried
out by the Tour Guide,-
To request or accept cash or any kind, from the concerned seller or any
other person, while providing any help in purchasing any goods or
rendering any service to the tourist for whom he/she has helps as a
Tourist Guide.
To compel a tourist to appoint him/her as a Tourist.
To provide his/her license to any other person to be engaged as a Tour
Guide.
Inserted by the Second Amendment
License may be cancelled: (1) The prescribed officer may cancel the Tour
Guide license in any of the following conditions:-
A person who has been convicted and imposed penalty of
imprisonment by a court in an offense involving moral
turpitude.
A person who is disqualified pursuant to Clause (b) of

Section 40.
A person who violates any act mentioned in Section 43.
(2) Before suspending a license of Tour Guide of a person pursuant to
Sub-section (1), an opportunity to put his/her defense shall be provided and at
least fifteen days time shall be given for such defense.
Penalty: (1) In case, any person commits conduct the following offence,
Government of Nepal may punish as follows:-
Upto Four Thousand Rupees fine for working as a Tour
Guide by without obtaining license pursuant to Section 39,
Upto Two Thousand Rupees fine for working as a Tour
Guide by without renewing license pursuant to Section 41.
(2) Except otherwise provided in Sub-section (1), in case, any Tour
Guide who does not abide by this Act, the Rules made there under and
 Amended by the Second Amendment.
direction, Government of Nepal may fine upto One Thousand Rupees.
(3) A person who is not satisfied with the order made by the
Government of Nepal pursuant to this Section, may file complaint within
Thirty five days before the Court of Appeal.
Chapter-5A
Provisions Relating to other Tourism Enterprise
45A. Provision relating to other Tourism Enterprise: The provisions relating to
registration, license, renewal, operation, suspension of license and cancellation
of registration of Rafting, Gliding, Ballooning, Jungle Safari, Camping,
Hiking, Bird Watching, Skiing and other prescribed tourism enterprise shall be
as prescribed.
45B. Approval to be obtain: A tourist, who is interested in rafting, trekking and
prescribed activity amongst tourism activity pursuant to Section 45A, shall
obtain an approval as prescribed upon paying prescribed fees.
45C. Penalty: (1) In case, someone operating a tourism enterprise pursuant to

Section 45A violates this Act or Rules made thereunder or direction or order of
Government of Nepal, the prescribed officer may fine him/her upto Twenty
Thousand Rupees.
(2) In case, a tourist who commits any activity mentioned in Section
45B without obtaining an approval pursuant to this Act or Rules framed
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
thereunder or a tourist who has obtained such approval violates this Act or
Rule framed thereunder, the prescribed officer may fine him/her upto Ten
Thousand Rupees.
(3) The aggrieved person, by the order made by prescribed officer
pursuant to Sub-section (1) and (2), may file a complaint before Government
of Nepal within Thirty five days and a decision made by Government of Nepal
to that effect shall be final.

Chapter-6
Miscellaneous
Restriction may be imposed on sale and purchase of Tourist Goods: (1)
Government of Nepal, by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette, may issue an
order to restrict the tourist not sale or donate or transfer the ownership on such
prescribed goods which he/she brought from abroad.
(2) In case, someone gives or takes the goods against the order issued
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Chief District Officer may fine equal to
claimed amount from the giver and seize the goods from receiver.
(3) A person who is not satisfied with the order made by the Chief
District Officer pursuant to Sub-section (2), may file an appeal within Thirty
five days, before the ‽Court of Appeal.
Power to submit or cause to submit the Report or Details: (1) A person,
who has obtained Travel and Trekking Agency license or registered Hotel and
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Justice Administration Act, 2048
Lodge pursuant to Section 10 or Tourism Enterprise pursuant to Section 45A,
shall submit a prescribed periodic report to Government of Nepal.
(2) Except otherwise provided in Sub-section (1), Government of Nepal
may request for other details from time to time, if deems necessary, from a
person who has obtained Travel or Trekking Agency license or registered
Hotel or Lodge pursuant to Section 10 or tourism enterprise pursuant to

Section 45A.
(3) Government of Nepal may inspect or cause to inspect or examine the
income and expenditure or any other record of the Travel or Trekking Agency
or registered Hotel or Lodge or an office or work place of tourism enterprise
mentioned in Section 45A.
Not mortgage or handover the business : A person, who has obtained Travel
or Trekking Agency license or registered Hotel or Lodge pursuant to Section
10 or tourism enterprise pursuant to Section 45A, shall not mortgage his/her
enterprise to any other person or shall not allow any other person to operate the
enterprise in his/her behalf.
Provided that, it shall not be considered to have created any bar to enter
into a transaction with any financial institution by the Travel or Trekking
 Inserted by the First Amendment.
Agency or registered Hotel or tourism enterprise mentioned in Section 45A.
+48A. Special Provision relating to Nepalese Tourist: (1) The provisions relating to
the Nepalese Tourist shall be as prescribed.
(2) Government of Nepal, by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette, or
may determine that any of the provisions of this Act may not be applicable to
the Nepalese Tourist.
Notice to be given for any Change in Detail: In case, the details submitted
with an application for the Travel or Trekking Agency license or registration of
the Hotel, Lodge, Restaurant or Resort Bar or registration of tourism
enterprise pursuant to Section 45A. is altered or changed such license of the
Travel or Trekking Agency or a person who registered the Hotel, Lodge,
Restaurant or Resort Bar or tourism enterprise pursuant to Section 45A, shall
submit the same to the Government of Nepal within in Thirty-five days of such
change or alteration.
Notice to be given for closing the Enterprise: A person, who has obtained a
Travel or Trekking Agency license or registered a Hotel, Lodge, Restaurant or
Resort Bar or the tourism enterprise pursuant to Section 45A closes his/her
business, he/she shall submit the notice to Government of Nepal, within fifteen
days of such closer.
Power to issue direction: Government of Nepal may issue necessary direction
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the First Amendment.
to a person who has obtained Travel or Trekking Agency license or registered
the Hotel, Lodge, Restaurant or Resort Bar or the tourism enterprise pursuant
to Section 45A on the matters which are related to tourism development.
Fine and Complaint: (1) In case, a person who commits the following acts,
Government of Nepal may fine upto Two Thousand Rupees such person:-
A person, who has a duty to submit a report pursuant to

Section 47, does not submit it as prescribed or causes
obstacle to the deputed employees for the inspection of
office or document.
A person who carries out the activities prohibited in the

Section 48.
A person who does not inform within the period as
mentioned in Section 49 or 50.
A person who does not abide the direction made by
pursuant to Section 51.
(2) A person who is not satisfied with the order made by the
Government of Nepal pursuant to Sub-section (1), may file complaint within
Thirty-five days before the Court of Appeal
53. Delegation of Powers: (1) Government of Nepal may delegate any or all of the
powers conferred to it under this Act, by a Notification in the Nepal Gazette, to
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
the any office, institution or official.
Right to Constitute Committee: Government of Nepal may constitute
Tourism Development Committee consisting governmental and nongovernmental persons to provide suggestions to Government of Nepal.
This Act shall not apply on the tourism activities operated by Government
of Nepal: Government of Nepal may issue an order not to apply all or any of
the provision to tour guide appointed by Government of Nepal or any Travel or
Trekking Agency, Hotel or tourism enterprise pursuant to Section 45A.
Power to Frame Rules: For the implementation of the objectives of this Act,
the Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules.
Repeal and Saving: (1) Tourism Industry Act, 2021 has been repealed.
(2) The license of a Travel Agency and Tour guide issued under
Tourism Industry Act, 2021 shall to have been received under this Act.
(3) The hotel registered as tourist standard under Tourism Industry Act,
2021shall be deemed as registered under this Act.
 Inserted by the First Amendment.
Note:
Words modified by the Tourism (First Amendment) Act, 2042
(a) "High Altitude Worker" instead of "High Altitude Potter"
(b) "Local Worker" instead of "Local Potter"
Words modified by the Tourism (Second Amendment) Act, 2053
(a) "His Majesty's Government instead of "Department"
(b) "Restaurant and Resort" instead of "Restaurant"
Words modified by Some Nepal Laws Amendment Act, 2063
"Government of Nepal" instead of "His Majesty Government"

===== SOURCE: Vital-Registration-Act.pdf =====

The Births, Deaths and Other Personal Events (Registration) Act, 2033
(1976)
Date of Royal Seal and Publication
2033.7.4 (20 October, 1976)
Amending Acts:
Date of Authentication and Publication
1. The Births, Deaths and Other Personal Events
Registration (First Amendment) Act, 2037 (1980)
2037.5.26
(11 September, 1980)
2. The Births, Deaths and Other Personal Events
Registration (Second Amendment) Act, 2048 (1991)
2048.7.14
(31 October, 1991)
3. The Act Amending Some Nepal Acts to Maintain
Gender Equality, 2063 (2006)
2063.7.17
(3 November, 2006)
4. The Act Consolidating Republic and Amending
Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2009)1
2066.10.7
(21 January, 2010)
5. The Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2072 (2016)
2072.11.13
(25 February, 2016)
6. The Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018)
2075.11.19
(3 March, 2019)
Act Number 44 of the Year 2033 (1976)
An Act Made for Registration of Births, Deaths, Marriages, Divorces and
Migrations
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions on the registration and
distribution of certificates of events such as births, deaths, marriages, divorces and
migrations of persons residing in …………3 Nepal;
This Act came into force on 2065.2.15 (28 May, 2008).
Deleted by the Act Consolidating Republic and Amending Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2009).
Deleted by the Act Consolidating Republic and Amending Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2009).
Now, therefore, be it enacted by His Majesty the King Birendra Bir Bikram Shah
Dev, on the advice and with the consent of the Rastriya Panchayat.
Short Title, Extent and Commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"Births, Deaths and Other Personal Events (Registration) Act, 2033 (1976)".
It shall extend to the whole of…………4 Nepal.

Section 1 shall commence immediately and the other Sections shall
commence on such date and in such area as the Government of Nepal may, by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette, appoint.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act, -
"Personal event" means the birth, death, marriage, divorce or migration of
any person.
"Migration"5 means the act of migrating from the area of one Rural
Municipality6 or Municipality to that of another Rural Municipality7 or
Municipality within Nepal or migrating to or from a foreign country, for a
period of more than six months.
"Registrar"8 means the Registrar or Local Registrar appointed or designated
pursuant to Section 3.
"Head of the family" means the senior person who makes arrangement in
the family or a person who maintains the family.
"Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in the
Rules framed under this Act.
Registrar and Local Registrar: (1) The Head of the National Identity Card
Management and Registration Department of the Government of Nepal shall, for
the purposes of this Act, act as the Registrar.
The employee who is designated by the concerned Rural
Municipality or Municipality Executive from amongst the employees serving in
the Rural Municipality or Municipality, on the basis of the standards specified by
the Registrar referred to in sub-section (1), shall act as the Local Registrar.
Deleted by the Act Consolidating Republic and Amending Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2009).
Amended by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2072 (2016).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2072 (2016).
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2019).
In making designation of the Local Registrar pursuant to sub-section
(2), a Local Registrar shall be designated for each Ward of the Rural Municipality
or Municipality.
Information of personal event: (1) The following persons in the following
circumstances shall, in order to have the personal event registered, give
information to the Office of the Local Registrar, in the form as prescribed, not
later than thirty-five days of the occurrence of such an event:
Information of birth and death by the head of the family, and in his
or her absence, a............10 major member of the family,
11(b)
Information of marriage by both the husband and wife,
12(c)
Information of divorce by the husband or wife,
Information of migration by the head of the family in the case of
migration of a family and by the person in the case of migration of
an individual.
If any personal event occurs outside 13…….Nepal, a person who has
the duty to give information of that event not later than sixty days after his or her
arrival in 14……Nepal.
The person who has the duty to give information of a personal event
pursuant to sub-section (1) may authorize any person to have such information
registered.
If there is no person to give information of the birth or death
pursuant to clause (a) of sub-section (1), such a person as may be prescribed by
Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette shall give such
information.
To Register Personal Event: (1) The Local Registrar shall, immediately upon
receiving the information referred to in Section 4, register such an event in the
concerned register, by doing the following:
Examining whether or not the form filled up by the informant is
correct or not, and if it is not correct, causing him or her to fill it up
correctly, and
The Act Amending Some Nepal Acts to Maintain Gender Equality, 2063 (2006)
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Deleted by the Act Consolidating Republic and Amending Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2010).
Deleted by the Act Consolidating Republic and Amending Some Nepal Laws, 2066 (2010).
In the event of the informant being illiterate and unable to fill up the
form, filling up, or causing to be filled up, the form as stated by the
informant, and taking his or her thumb impressions on it.
In registering the information of divorce, it shall be registered upon
looking at, inter alia, with the decision of the concerned court.
(3)15
If the person appears for the registration of a personal event after
the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 4, the Local
Registrar shall register the event upon collecting the fee of fifty rupees.
…….16
To issue certificate: The Local Registrar shall, immediately upon registering the
information of a personal event pursuant to Section 5, issue, free of cost, the
registration certificate to the person specified in sub-section (1) of Section 4.
6A.17 Prohibition on making registration and issuing certificate: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, it is prohibited to register any personal
events including marriages which are void under the prevailing and issue
certificates thereof.
If it is requested for the registration of any personal event pursuant
to sub-section (1), separate records of the event shall be maintained and the matter
shall be submitted to the concerned body or authority to take action in relation to
that matter in accordance with the prevailing law.
Nothing contained in this Section shall prejudice the matter
requiring registration of the birth of an infant born as a consequence of the
marriage that is void.
Power to issue duplicate copy of certificate: (1) If the registration certificate
issued pursuant to Section 6 is lost or damaged due to any reason, the concerned
person shall make an application to the concerned Local Registrar’s Office.
The concerned Local Registrar shall, if he or she finds the content
of the application made pursuant to sub-section (1) to be reasonable, issue the
duplicate copy of the registration certificate upon collecting the prescribed fees.
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Deleted by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Power to depute employee to prepare inventory of family: (1) If it appears
necessary to prepare an inventory of families for the purpose of registration of
personal events, the Government of Nepal may depute employees for that purpose.
It shall be the duty of the concerned person to provide such details
or answer such questions as asked by the employee deputed pursuant to subsection (1).
Recognition of registration: The registration certificate issued pursuant to

Section 6 shall be the evidence of occurrence of the personal event, and such
evidence may be submitted to any office or court and used in any personal
transaction.
Provided, however, that, if it is proved that any person has received the
registration certificate upon submitting false details, such a registration certificate
shall be revoked.
189A. Power to correct registered age, name and caste free of cost: (1) If the age,
name or caste of a child who is born after the commencement of this Act has to be
corrected after the issuance of the registration certificate after the same has once
been registered pursuant to this Act, the concerned person may make an
application to the Local Registrar’s Office in the prescribed form not later than six
months of the date of such issuance of the registration certificate.
Upon receiving an application made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Local Registrar may, upon inquiring thereinto, make correct, free of cost, the age,
name or caste mentioned in the register and the registration certificate.
No age, name or caste of a person registered in the register and the
registration certificate referred to in this Act may be corrected in accordance with
any other prevailing law, except in accordance with this Section.
Personal event register may be inspected: If any person wishes to inspect the
personal event register held in the.............Local Registrar’s Office, the concerned
Registrar may allow such a person to inspect the register upon collecting the
prescribed fees.
Records to be maintained: Each Local Registrar’s Office shall, as soon as
possible, send the details of personal events registered each month to the Registrar,
Inserted by the First Amendment.
and the Registrar shall collect and analyse the details so received, update the
records of personal events registration and also publish annual results.
1911A. Development of integrated electronic system: (1) The Government of Nepal
shall develop and operate an integrated electronic system for the registration of
personal events.
The Rural Municipality or Municipality shall have access to the
electronic system brought into operation pursuant to sub-section (1), and the Rural
Municipality or Municipality shall follow such a system in the registration of
personal events.
2012. Duty of Rural Municipality or Municipality: (1) If the occurrence of a personal
event required to be registered pursuant to this Act comes to its knowledge, the
concerned Rural Municipality or Municipality21 shall remind and convince and
provide necessary assistance to, the concerned person with respect to the
registration of information of such an event.
It shall be the duty of the Rural Municipality or Municipality22 to
provide necessary assistance to the deputed employee or the Local Registrar in the
course of the functions required to be performed pursuant to this Act or the Rules
framed hereunder.
Penalties: (1) A person who does not provide such details or answer such question
as demanded or asked pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 8 shall be liable to a
fine not exceeding two hundred rupees23.
(2)24
If any person is proved to have given information of a false personal
event with the intention of harassing any other person or making a personal gain,
such a person who has given such false information shall be liable to a fine not
exceeding one hundred rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
month or the both, and if the registration of such an event has already been
effected, such registration shall be revoked.
If any person knowingly destroys the information form or register
or family record that is in his or her custody or uses the same for a personal gain
Inserted by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2075 (2018).
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2072 (2018).
Amended by the First Amendment.
or unauthorized purpose, such a person shall be liable to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding three months or a fine of three hundred rupees to six hundred rupees
or the both.
(4)25
If any person is held to have prevented or hindered any other person
appearing to have a personal event registered from registering such an event or
provoked that other person in relation to such registration, such a person shall be
liable to a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees.
Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall be the
plaintiff in any case punishable under Section 13.
Adjudicating authority and procedures: (1) The Chief District Officer shall
have the power to try and settle the cases punishable under Section 13.
The Chief District Officer shall, in trying the cases pursuant to subsection (1), follow the procedures referred to in the Special Court Act, 2059 (…).
An appeal against the decision of the Chief District Officer shall lie
in the High Court.26
Power to remove difficulties: If any difficulty arises with the implementation of
this Act, the Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette,
issue necessary order to remove such a difficulty.
Power to frame Rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules
in order to implement the objectives of this Act.
Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by subsection (1), such Rules may be framed in the following matters, in particular:
Relating to the form of information of personal events required to
be filled up pursuant to this Act or register to be maintained in the
Local Registrar’s Office,27
Relating to the certificate of registration of the personal event,
Relating to the copy of the certificate of registration and fees for the
inspection of the register of personal events,
Relating to the particulars necessary for the preparation of family
records or specification of the form of questionnaire,
Relating to correction in details,
Inserted by the First Amendment.
Amended by the Act Amending Some Nepal Acts, 2072 (2016).
Amended by the Second Amendment.
Relating to registration of the name of a child and making change in
the name already registered.
Districts of commencement of the remaining Sections of the Act yet to
be commenced and dates thereof
SN Name of District
commencement
of the Act
Date of publication
Nepal
Gazette
Jhapa, Rahautat, Morang, Kathmandu,
Saptari, Kapilvastu, Mahottari, Banke,
Sarlahi and Kanchanpur (10)
2034.1.1
(13 May, 1977)
2033.12.29
(11 April, 1977)
Bara, Parsa, Dhanusa and Sunsari (4)
2035.10.1
January,
1979)
2035.8.26
December,
1978)
Siraha (1)
2035.11.1
(13 February,
1979)
2035.8.26
December, 1978)
Rupandehi and Nawalparasi (2)
2035.12.1
March,
1979)
2035.8.26
December,
1978)
Chitawan,
Makawanpur,
Bardia
Kailali (4)
2036.11.1(13
February, 1980)
2035.8.26
December, 1978)
Kavreplanchowk, Kaski and Palpa (3)
2036.11.1
February,
1980)
2035.8.26
December,
1978)
Lalitpur, Bhaktapur and Surkhet (3)
2036.11.1
(13 February,
1980)
2036.11.1
February,
1980)
Daang (1)
2036.12.1(14
March, 1979)
2036.11.1
February, 1980)
Tanahu, Nuwakot and Dhading (3)
2037.9.1
(15 December,
1980)
2037.7.25
November, 1980)
10. Ilam and Dhankuta
2037.10.1
January, 1981)
2037.7.25
November, 1980)
11. Jumla
2038.8.1(16
November,
1981)
2038.8.1
November, 1981)
12. Gorkha (1)
2038.8.1(16
November,
1981)
2038.8.1(16
November, 1981)
13. Sindhuli and Udayapur (2)
2038.9.1
(16 December,
1981)
2038.8.1
(16 November,
1981)
14. Syangja (1)
2038.10.1
(14 January
1982)
2038.8.1
(16 November,
1981)
15. Sindhupalchowk (1)
2038.11.1
(12 February,
1982)
2038.8.1(16
November, 1981)
16. Rasuwa (1)
2038.12.
(14 March,
1982)
2038.8.1
(16 November,
1981)
17. Panchthar, Taplejung, Terathum, Bhojpur,
Sankhuwasava,
Solukhumbu,
Okhaldhunga,
Khotang,
Ramechhap,
Dolakha, Lamjung, Manang, Myagdi,
Baglung, Parbat, Mustang, Arghakhachi,
Gulmi, Puythan, Salyan, Rolpa, Rukum,
Dolpa, Mugu, Humla, Kalikot, Jajarkot,
Dailekha, Achham, Doti, Bajura, Bajhang,
Darchula, Baitadi and Dadeldhura (35)
2047.1.1
(14 April,
1990)
2046.12.6
(19 March, 1990)