National Human Rights Commission Act, 2068
(2012)
Date of Publication
2068.10.7 (21 Jan. 2012)
Act No. 14 of 2068 (2012)
Preamble : Whereas, it is expedient to make legal provisions wi th regard
to the functions, duties, powers and procedures of the National Human
Rights Commission to ensure the respect, protection and promotion as well
as effective implementation of human rights,
Now, therefore, be it in enacted by Constituent Ass embly in the
capacity of the the Legislature Parliament pursuant to Article 83 of the
Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2063.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
1. Short Title and Commencement : (1) This Act shall be called
the "National Human Rights Commission Act, 2068."
(2) This Act shall come into immediately.
2. Definition: Unless the subject or context otherwise requires, i n this
Act:-
a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission .
b) "Commission" means the National Human Rights Commission
established in accordance with Article 131 of the C onstitution.
c) "Complaint" means a petition or complaint regarding the
violation of human rights or abetment thereof submitte d to the
Commission and the term also includes the information
received by the Commission on the matter through any o ther
source.
d) "Employee" means an employee of the Commission.
e) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as
prescribed in the Rules formulated under this Act.
f) "Human Rights" means rights related to life, liberty, equality
and dignity of a person provided by the Constitutio n and other
prevailing laws and this term also includes the rig hts contained
in the international treaties regarding human rights to which
Nepal is a party.
g) "Secretary" means the Secretary of the Commission.
h) "Member" means a member of the Commission and this
term also includes the Chairperson,
i) "Constitution" means the Interim Constitution of Nepa l,
2063 (2007)

Chapter - 2
The meetings, functions, duties and powers of the
Commission
3. Meeting of the Commission : (1) The commission shall meet at
least twice a month.
(2) The meeting of the Commission shall be held on s uch
date, time and venue as prescribed by the Chairperso n.
(3) As directed by the Chairperson, generally the S ecretary
shall have to inform the members in writing at least Twenty Four
hours in advance of the meeting citing the date, ti me, venue and
agenda of the meeting of the Commission.
(4) If a majority of the existing number of members of the
Commission are present in the meeting, it shall be de emed to
constitute a quorum for the meeting.
(5) The Chairperson shall chair the meeting of the
Commission and in his/her absence the senior-most memb er shall
chair the meeting.
(6) The decisions of the Commission shall be made by a
majority of the members present in the meeting and in case of a tie;
the person chairing the meeting shall give a castin g vote.
(8) The Secretary shall authenticate the decisions of the
meeting of the Commission.
(9) Other procedures related to the meetings shall b e as
determined by the Commission.
4. Functions, Duties and Powers : (1) In addition to the functions,
duties and powers as returned to in Article 132 of the Constitution,
other functions, duties and powers of the Commission shall be as
follows : -
(a) To conduct or to cause to conduct inspections
and monitoring of prisons, other agencies of the
Government of Nepal, public institutions or
private institutions or any other place for the
protection of human rights, and to provide
necessary suggestions or directives to the agency
concerned with regard to the improvement to be
made in such agency, institution or place for the
protection of human rights,
(b) To conduct investigations with the permission of
the court concerned in any sub-judice case in
which claims involving human rights violation
have been made,
(c) To monitor the implementation status of the
prevailing laws regarding human rights and
recommend to the Government of Nepal for
effective implementation thereof,
(d) To undertake study and research into various
aspects of protection, promotion, enhancement
and implementation of human rights,
(e) To recommend to concerned institution for
including human rights education oriented subject
matter related into the syllabus of school and
university,
(f) To review the existing state of human rights and
make public reports to that effect,
(g) To carry out or cause to be carried out other
activities as may be deemed necessary and
appropriate for the protection and promotion,
enhancement of human rights.
(2) The Commission shall be independent and autonomou s in
fulfilling the work of ensuring respect, protection and promotion of
human rights.
5. May Draw Attention : (1) The Commission may draw attention
of any agency or official, as may be necessary to an y matter related
to the protection and promotion of human rights.
(2) In case attention is drawn pursuant to Sub-sect ion (1) by
the Commission, the agency or official concerned shal l have to take
necessary action accordingly and inform the same to t he Commission.
6. Commission May Provide Opinion or Consultations : (1) The
Government of Nepal, regarding the matters in which i t is obliged to
submit a report to the concerned authority under the International
Treaty related to Human Rights, shall have to write to the
Commission for Opinion before forwarding the report.
(2) If the request for Opinion in writing is receiv ed
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission shall hav e to provide
Opinion to the Government of Nepal on the matter as s oon as
possible.
(3) If the Government of Nepal seeks consultations f rom the
Commission regarding the formulation of any legislatio n or the
amendment of any existing legislation regarding Human Rights, the
Commission may provide Opinion to the Government of Ne pal on the
matter.
(4) The Commission may make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal to formulate new legislations or to make
amendments in any existing legislation or to become a party to any
International or Regional Convention regarding Human Rights.
(5) If the Government of Nepal seeks consultations f rom the
Commission regarding becoming a party to any Internat ional or
Regional Treaty (convention) related to Human Rights , the
Commission may provide Opinion to the Government of Nep al on the
matter.
7. To Make Names Public and Keep their Record : (1) The
Commission may make public names of officials, persons o r agencies
that do not knowingly implement or observe the recomme ndations or
orders or directives made by the Commission with regar d to
violations of human rights as Human Rights Violators .
(2) Prior to making public the names pursuant to Subsection
(1), the Commission shall have to write to officials, persons or
agencies stating that they did not observe or impleme nt the
Commission's recommendations, orders or directives, gi ving a
Fifteen-days timeline to such officials, persons or agencies to submit
clarifications.
(3) In case such officials, persons or agencies do not submit
clarifications within the stipulated timeline after receiving in
writing pursuant to Sub-section (2) or in case the clarifications do
not seem to be reasonable, the Commission may make publ ic the
names of such officials, persons or agencies as ref erred to in Subsection (1).
(4) The Commission shall keep the records of the names of
such officials, persons or agencies whose names have been made
public pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(5) While recommending a person whose name has been m ade
public pursuant to Sub-section (1) for appointment, promotion and
career development in any public post, the concerne d agency may take
the records maintained pursuant to Sub-section (4) a s a basis.
(6) While assigning new responsibility to an offici al whose
name has been made public pursuant to Sub-section (1 ), the
concerned agency may take the records maintained purs uant to Subsection (4) as a basis in relation to his/her capab ility (competence).
8. May Constitute a Committee or Taskforce : (1) The
Commission may from a committee or taskforce as it requ ires, for
execution of its function.
(2) The functions, duties and powers of the committee or
taskforce formed pursuant to Sub Section (1) and the facilities of
the members of such committee or taskforce shall be a s
determined by the Commission.
(3) The committee or taskforce formed pursuant to Sub -section
(1), after completing the task assigned by the Commis sion, shall have
to furnish a report to the Commission on the task whi ch it has
completed.
(4) The Commission, if it finds appropriate, may disso lve the
committee or taskforce formed pursuant to Sub-section (1) at any
time.
9. Provision regarding Interim Relief and Rescue : (1) In case the
Commission deems that if the victim is not provided re lief or is not
rescued immediately, it may cause further damage to hi m/her, the
Commission may issue an order in the name of the agency
concerned to immediately make interim relief available to the victim
or to rescue such victim.
(2) The concerned agency shall have to provide reli ef to the
victim immediately after the Commission issues an order .
(3) If such relief is made available in cash, the co ncern person
or agency shall recover such amount from human righ ts violators as
prescribed.
(4) The Commission may request any institution, organ ization
or persons for cooperation to make available interi m relief to the
victims or to rescue the victims.
(5) Other arrangements with regard to interim relief and rescue
shall be as prescribed.

Chapter - 3
Procedures Relating to Complaint Proceedings
10. Complaint may be Lodged : (1) In case of violation of human
rights or abetment thereof, the victim himself or hers elf or anyone
on behalf of him or her, may lodge a complaint as pre scribed by the
Commission.
(2) In case a complaint is received pursuant to Sub -section (1),
the Commission shall have to provide a receipt of the registration to
the complainant after registering such complaint in t he registration
book.
(3) In case information on human rights violation or abetment
thereof is received through verbal means or through any other means,
such information shall have to be registered in the registration book
pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preva iling laws,
no fee shall be charged for any complaint lodged pu rsuant to Subsection (1) or information provided pursuant to Subsection (3).
(5) Complaints regarding the incidents of human righ ts
violation or its abetment shall have to be lodged at the Commission
within Six months from the date on which the incide nt took place or
within Six months from the date on which a person, un der control of
someone else, got released and became public.
11. Preliminary proceedings on the complaint : (1) The
Commission shall have to initiate preliminary proceedi ngs
immediately as prescribed as soon as a complaint rega rding the
incidents of human rights violation or abetment there of is received
as referred to in Sub-section (1) of Section 10 or information
pursuant to Sub-section (3) is received or if the C ommission
deems it appropriate to investigate into the matter on its own
discretion.
(2) While taking an action in accordance with Sub-s ection
(1), if the Commission finds prima facie that the human rights of any
individual is being violated or abetted, it may iss ue appropriate orders
in the name of concerned agency or official to immedi ately stop such
12. Inquiry and Investigation into Complaints : (1) If there seems, a
situation where human rights of any individual has been or may be
violated or abetted, from the preliminary proceedings pursuant to
Sub-section (1) of Section 11, the Commission may its elf or after
appointing investigation team or investigation offic er pursuant to
necessity conduct or cause to conduct inquiry or in vestigation as
prescribed.
(2) After completing inquiry and investigation purs uant to Subsection (1), the investigation team or investigatio n officer shall have to
submit a report thereof to the Commission.
(3) After receiving the report as referred to in Su b-section
(2), the Commission may seek services of the expert, collect further
evidence or summon witnesses or conduct public hearin gs as
prescribed.
(4) Other provisions regarding Inquiry and Investig ations shall
be as prescribed.
13. Complaint may be Repealed or Put on Hold : (1) If the
complaint or information received to the Commission or the matters
investigated by the Commission on its own discretion seems baseless
or does not seem to fall under the jurisdiction of t he Commission, the
Commission may dismiss or ( tameli ) such complaint, information or
matter with reasons thereof at any time.
(2) In case of the complaint is dismissed or put on hold
pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission shall hav e to inform
the concerned individual of the same within fifteen days.
Provided that, it shall not binding to the commission to give
information regarding the false complaint
14. Provisions Relating to Reconciliation: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Act, if the co ncerned parties
lodge a joint petition for reconciliation in respec t of any complaint
that is under consideration in the Commission, the C ommission
may have them reconciled as prescribed.
Provided that, regarding the matters which are consi dered as
serious violation of human rights and humanitarian l aw under the
international laws or regarding the matters in which reconciliation
(milapatra) cannot take place in accordance with the prevailin g laws,
no reconciliation shall take place in accordance wi th this Section.
(2) It shall be the duty of the parties concerned t o abide by
the reconciliation reached pursuant to Sub-section (1).
(3) Once the reconciliation is reached regarding an y
complaint as referred to in Sub-section (1), proceed ings thereof
shall be considered to have ended and complaints can not be lodged
again on such matters.
(4) Other provisions regarding reconciliation shall be as
prescribed.
15. Decisions to be made : The Commission shall, on the basis of the
evidences acquired through inquiry and investigatio n with regard to
the complaint or information received by the Commission or the
matter on which it initiated action at its own discr etion, make
decisions, generally within six months from the dat e of complaint
citing the grounds and reasons of whether or not hu man rights
violation or its abetment has taken place.
Provided that, it shall cause no hindrance to decid e the case upon
showing reasons thereof if the case can not be decided within Six months.
16. Provision regarding Compensation : (1) If it seems necessary to
provide compensation to the victim from the inquiry an d
investigation launched pursuant to Section 12, the Commission shall
have to make a decision citing the same while making a decision
pursuant to Section 15.
(2) The type, quantum or amount of compensation sha ll be
determined in the decision taken pursuant to Sub-sec tion (1).
(3) The Commission may, while determining the amount
pursuant to Sub-section (2), prescribe a maximum of Three Hundred
Thousand Rupees depending on the condition of the v ictim.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere i n this
Section, the Commission shall not take any decision r egarding
compensation if the victim has already received comp ensation or if
the proceedings for compensation have already been moved forward
pursuant to other prevailing laws regarding human r ights violation.
(5) The criteria to be adopted while taking decisio n to
provide compensation pursuant to this Section and ot her provisions
regarding Compensation shall be as prescribed.
17. Implementation of the Recommendation, Decision or Order
of the Commission : (1) The Commission shall have to write to
the concerned official, individual or agency for the implementation
of the recommendation, decision or order issued by the Commission
pursuant to the Constitution or this Act.
(2) In case of receiving in writing from the Commissi on to
implement the recommendation, decision or order as ref erred to in
Sub-section (1), the concerned official, individual or agency shall
have to inform the Commission generally upon implementin g such
recommendation, decision or orders.
(3) The concerned official, individual or agency shall have
to send a report to the Commission containing informat ion about the
difficulties in implementing the recommendation, decisi on or order
of the Commission, citing the reasons thereof, within Two months
from the date of receiving the recommendation, decisio n or orders
from the Commission pursuant to Sub-section (2).
(4) If information pursuant to Sub-section (3) is re ceived, the
Commission shall reconsider the matter and take a deci sion and the
Commission, while taking a decision accordingly, may ma ke
recommendations for implementation as it is or with ame ndments.
(5) If the Commission writes again for implementation after
taking a decision again pursuant to Sub-section (4) , the concerned
official, individual or agency shall have to implemen t accordingly as
soon as possible and inform the Commission.
(6) The concerned agency shall have to provide
compensation to the victim within the period as refer red to in Subsection (2) in accordance with the decision of the Commission. If the
victim has died or if he or she is not sound mentally , compensation
shall be provided to the person considered appropri ate by the
Commission from among his or her dependents including husband or
wife, father, mother, son, daughter, elder brother, younger brother,
elder sister, younger sister, grandson, granddaught er or grandfather or
grandmother.
(7) If in the decision of the Commission, it is deeme d that
human rights violation took place after an official acted with mala
fide intention or with prejudice against anyone and that
compensation has to be provided to the victim from suc h official,
the compensation shall be provided by the agency in which such an
official holds an office.
(8) The amount of compensation provided to the victim by
the concerned agency pursuant to Sub-section (7) shall be deducted
from the monthly salary or any other amount to be rece ived by the
concerned official.
Provided that, if such official has already been r etired from
service at the time of Commission's decision, the conc erned agency
shall have to provide the amount of compensation to the victim for
the time being and shall have to recover such an am ount from such
individual pursuant to prevailing law.
(9) If cash has been provided as an interim relief pursuant to

Section 9 such as an amount shall be deducted as pr escribed while
providing compensation to the victim pursuant to thi s Section.
(10) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere i n this
Section, with regards to matters on which recommendati on has been
made by the Commission pursuant to Clause (c) of Sub-Article (2) of

Article 132 of the Constitution, if the Attorney Ge neral decides that a
case cannot be initiated pursuant to prevailing law s, the Office of
the Attorney General shall have to inform to the Co mmission
thereof.
(11) The Commission may write to the concerned authority for the
departmental or other action to be taken against the official, person or the
authority whose name has been recorded on the basis of their noncooperation in connection with human rights violati ons or the
investigation of inquiry carried out pursuant to this Act or on the basis of
non-compliance of the directives issued by the Comm ission pursuant to
Sub-section (7).
(12) The Commission may write to the concerned authority on the
basis of the recommendations with regard to the off icial or the persons
whose name has been made public as the human rights violators as
referred to in the Sub-section (7),
(13) Other provisions regarding the implementation o f
recommendation, order or decision of the Commission shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter -4
Miscellaneous
18. Commission may Coordinate or Collaborate with Other
Agencies : The Commission may, in the course of performing its
functions consult or seek assistance from or maintain necessary
coordination or collaboration with any Commission, co mmittee or
any other agency.
19. May Provide or Seek Expert Services: (1) The Commission
may, in relation to any matters related to human right s, provide
specialized or expert services pursuant to the requ est made by any
agency as prescribed.
(2) The Commission may seek the services of any specia lized
agency or expert in the course of performing its fun ctions as
prescribed.
(3) The functions, duties and powers of the agency or the
expert providing specialized or expert services pur suant to Subsection (2) and the facilities to be received by su ch agency or expert
shall be as determined by the Commission.
20. Contact and Relation may be Maintained with
Organizations : (1) The Commission may to discharge its
responsibilities effectively in accordance with the Constitution, this
Act and other prevailing laws, maintain necessary co ntact and relation
with the national and international organizations r elated with
protection and promotion of human rights and enter into
agreements with them in order to exchange cooperation .
(2) If financial matters constitute part of such agr eement
struck pursuant to Sub-section (1), the Commission s hall have to
seek approval from the Finance Ministry with regards to such
agreement.
(3) If any foreign organization wants to conduct pr ogrammes
on the protection and promotion of human rights in N epal, such an
organization shall have to seek consent of the Commis sion.
21. To Help in the Functioning of the Commission : (1) Concerned
agency or official shall have to provide assistance sought by the
Commission.
(2) The Commission shall have to write to initiate
departmental action to the agency concerned against the official
who, intentionally has not provided information, pap ers or evidence
sought by the Commission or who, intentionally, has n ot followed the
recommendations, orders or decisions of the Commission or who,
intentionally has not cooperate in its work or thos e who has
intentionally refused to be present before the Commis sion on being
summoned.
22. May send to Court or Other Agencies : In case, the
Commission satisfies that victim shall get justice wh en a court or
any other agency decides on the matter on which it h ad launched
an inquiry and investigation or if it satisfies tha t the matter falls under
the jurisdiction of a court or other agency, it may inform the party
concerned to go to such court or agency to file pet itions/lodge
complaints on the matter pursuant to prevailing laws .
23. No Obstruction in the Commission's Functioning : It shall cause
no obstruction in the functioning of the Commission me rely on the
ground that the post of any member is vacant.
24. May Function as an Acting : The senior-most member from
among the members of the Commission shall function as Ac ting
Chairperson if the post of the Chairperson is vacan t or he or she is in
foreign visits or on leave for more than Seven days .
25. Remuneration and Facilities : (1) The remunerations, conditions
of services and other benefits of the Chairperson and Members shall be
equal to those of the Chairperson and the Members o f constitutional
bodies pursuant to the prevalent law.
Provided that, this Clause shall not debar the offi ce bearers to
withdraw the remuneration and benefits which they a re enjoying at the
time of commencement of this Act.
26. Office of the Commission : (1) The central office of the
Commission shall be located in Kathmandu valley.
(2) The Commission may establish its regional, sub-reg ional or
liaison offices as it requires in consultation with the Ministry of
Finance.
27. Organizational Structure of the Commission: The Government of
Nepal shall, on the recommendation of the Commission, a pprove the
organizational structure of the Commission and posts.
28. Secretary of the Commission: (1) There shall be a Secretary as an
administrative head of the Commission.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall, on the recommendation
of the Commission, appoint the Secretary.
(3) The eligibility, remuneration, facilities and servi ce
conditions of the Secretary shall be equal to that of the employee of
Gazetted Special Class of the Government of Nepal.
(4) The Secretary shall carry out his/her function unde r the
general direction of the Chairperson.
(5) Other functions, duties and powers of the Secretary , in
addition to the functions, duties and powers prescr ibed in this Act and
other prevailing laws, shall be as follows:
(a) To undertake administrative and management
work,
(b) To prepare annual budgets, programmes and
plans and submit them to the Commission,
(c) To take care of and maintain movable and
immovable properties of the Commission,
(d) To make necessary arrangements for smooth
operation of the Commission's work and
proceedings,
(e) To implement or cause to implement effectively
the policies, programmes and decisions of the
Commission,
(f) To undertake other works as prescribed.
(6) If the post of the Secretary falls vacant, the Commission
may designate the senior-most officer as Acting Secr etary from
among the officer-level employees working in the Commi ssion until
further arrangement is made.
29. Logo of the Commission : The Commission may bring into use a
separate logo apart from the Coat-of-Arms of the State.
30. Delegation of Power : The Commission may delegate some of
the powers vested with it in accordance with the Co nstitution and
this Act to the Chairperson, Member or any officer-level employee
of the Commission, any officer-level employee of the
Government of Nepal or a committee or taskforce formed by the
Commission or any agency, organization or individual.
31. Liaison with the Government of Nepal : Office of the Prime
Minister and the Council of Ministers, shall liaiso n the commission
with Government of Nepal.
Provided that, this Section shall not be construed to have
obstructed the Commission in maintaining direct contac t with any
other agency in course of performing of its function s.
32. Power to Frame Rules, Procedures and Directives : (1) The
Commission may framing necessary Rules to fulfill the objectives of
this Act. Among such Rules, while framing the Rules involving
moneys to be charged on the Government of Nepal, it shall have to
seek approval from Ministry of Finance.
(2) The Commission may formulate and implement necessary
procedures or directives to carry out its functions in a well-organized
33. Protection of action taken in Good Faith : Regarding any act
done or intended to be done in good faith by the Co mmission or the
Chairperson or a Member or employee or any individual assigned by
the Commission pursuant to this Act or Rules there un der, no suit or
legal proceedings shall be initiated.
34. To be in Accordance with the Prevailing Laws : In the matters
contained in this Act, this Act shall prevail and i n other matters,
action shall be taken in accordance with prevailing laws.
35. Repeal and Savings : (1) Human Rights Commission Act, 2053 is,
hereby, repealed.
(2) Functions and proceedings undertaken in accorda nce with
Human Rights Commission Act, 2053 shall be considered as
undertaken in accordance with this Act.