THE DRAFT OF
CIVIL CODE,
CIVIL PROCEDURES CODE
AND REPORT, 2010
Government of Nepal
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
KATHMANDU
CIVIL CODE
Publisher:
Ministry of Law and Justice
Number of Copies:
Publication Assistance:
Enhancing Access to Justice Project
Thapagaon, New Baneshwor
Copyright:
With the publisher
Printed by:
New Era Offset Press
Government of Nepal
Personal Secretariat of Minister of Law and Justice
Hon’ble Prem Bahadur Singh
Message
The civil law of Nepal is being mainly regulated and managed by the
Muluki Ain (Country Code) enacted and brought into force on the 1st
of August, 1963. On the one hand the civil law provisions in the
Country Code are extremely primitive, while on the other, the modern
principles of civil law have been scattered in other Nepal laws as the
Code could not accommodate those principles. Since the principles of
civil law enshrined in the prevailing laws could not respond to the
necessity and requirements of the open, liberal and democratic system
of governance of the 21st century, therefore, the need of formulating a
separate Civil Code amending and consolidating the provisions of
civil law was felt long time back.
The country ushered in republican form of government after the
election to the Constituent Assembly in 2008 as a result of the historic
second people’s movement. In order to reform and modernize the
existing civil law of the country according to the existing economic,
social and cultural situation according to the spirit of republic and to
prepare the drafts of Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code,
Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers) had formed a civil law
reform and consolidation task force on December 3, 2008 under the
convenorship of Mr. Khilaraj Regmi, Hon’ble Justice of Supreme
Court. The task force has prepared the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code according to its mandate within the given time and
submitted it to Government of Nepal. I am happy to publish and share
with general public these drafts.
It is my sincere belief that if the drafts, which have been prepared by
the task force with deep study, wide discussions and massive
consultation with the relevant stakeholders, could take the form of
Acts, there would be significant breakthrough in civil law
administration of the country.
Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers) has directed Ministry of
Law and Justice to take necessary actions and to make public these
drafts. The ministry has initiated the process of seeking feedbacks
from the relevant stakeholders and these drafts have been published
for making people informed about them and to seek comments and
feedbacks from general public as well. I would like to assure all that
after obtaining feedbacks and comments and suggestions from all
stakeholders and general people, the ministry will submit Bills to
Legislature-Parliament with high priority after fulfilling the required
procedures.
Finally, on behalf of Government of Nepal, I would like to extend
sincere thanks to the Convenor, members of the task force and other
relevant persons who have fulfilled this burdensome responsibility of
preparing the draft having adjusted their busy schedules and engaged
in morning, evening and public holidays.
Kathmandu, October 7, 2010.
Minister
Law and Justice
Foreword
Civil law is the charter of civil relationship of every country. It is the
only instrument on the basis of which relationship between citizens is
regulated and managed. Since day-to-day behavior and relationship of
citizens are operated by principles of civil law, it is of utmost
importance in the civil life.
In 1853, the Country Code was first enacted having consolidated the
then civil law principles and we are at the present situation with
amendment to that Code from time-to-time. The provisions made in
the Code are in the primitive stage and it is sure that they could not
respond to the changing need of the time, the liberalized policy
adopted by the country, provisions made in the international human
rights instruments to which Nepal is a party and the principles
developed and recognized in international arena in the field of civil
law. In this context, it is a matter of national priority to reform and
modernize the civil law of the country.
There have been efforts in the past to reform civil law. However, the
purpose of those efforts was not to integrate and codify entire civil
law. Realizing this need, Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers)
had formed a Taskforce under the convenorship of a Justice of the
Supreme Court on the recommendation of the Judicial Council and
prescribed the terms of reference of the Taskforce.
The Taskforce has prepared the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code subject to the prescribed terms of reference. While
performing its tasks, the Taskforce has prepared the drafts having
studied, reviewed and analyzed the existing civil law, the principles
laid down by the Supreme Court, the provisions made in the treaties to
which Nepal is a party, Nepal’s social and cultural characteristics, the
Civil Codes of the countries which have codified their civil laws (such
as Japan, France, the Philippines, Italy), and the substantive and
procedural laws of the neighboring countries.
There may be debate as to whether or not codification is the
appropriate way of reforming and modernizing law. The task of
managing the scattered provisions of law in one Act is itself a
challenging job and it is possible only by way of codification. The
process of codification of laws in Nepal seems to be relevant as in the
recent past, there has been a growing trend of codification even in the
countries which did not have experience of codification in the past and
codification of civil law by two of the South-East Asian countries
(Vietnam and Cambodia) just a few years ago. It is the belief of the
Taskforce that with the implementation of the proposed two drafts,
there will be qualitative reform on the civil law of Nepal and modern
national legal system will be established in the country through simple
and comprehensive law.
Drafting of law itself is a difficult, time-taking and technical work.
The Taskforce is of the view that drafting of civil law which covers
vast and wide areas of civic relationship is much more difficult and
challenging. Though effort has been made in the drafts prepared by
the Taskforce to give it a final touch from conceptual as well as
drafting point of view, it is not that there may not be any room for
further improvement. Since the provisions have been made having had
deep studies and intensive discussions on each of them, the concerned
agencies would make efforts on the matters to be improved on the
drafts without tempering the underlying concepts in them.
Law reform is a perennial process and it would attract in cases of the
proposed codes. I express my heartfelt gratitude to Government of
Nepal (Council of Ministers) and Judicial Council on the capacity of
the convener of the Taskforce for entrusting this significant
responsibility having formed the Taskforce in my convenership after
taking policy decision to take the convenorship and leadership of the
by a Justice of the Supreme Court.
In this important task of modernization of civil law by reform and
modification
preparation
drafts,
intensive
unprecedented cooperation is extended from national and international
organization and persons. The Taskforce is grateful to all the
institutions,
organizations
persons
extending
invaluable
suggestions in reforming the drafts. The Taskforce also extends thanks
to Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo of the Keio University, Japan; Prof. Satoshi
Minamikata of the Niigata University, Japan and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki
Kihara of the Asia University, Japan and Mr. Taro Morinaga, Lecturer,
Ministry of Justice, Japan for providing suggestions by examining the
drafts of the Taskforce. The Taskforce also extends its heartfelt thanks
to the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Government of
Japan for providing opportunity to the Taskforce to have interaction
with the Professors in Japan and to observe the various aspects of use
of the civil law in Japan.
Similarly, the Taskforce expresses gratitude to Hon’ble Justices of the
Supreme Court for making contribution in improving the drafts giving
their invaluable suggestions on the proposed drafts.
I would like to thank the Supreme Court, Office of Attorney General,
Ministry of Law and Justice, Nepal Bar Association and its
Chairperson and the Enhancing Access to Justice Project of UNDP for
extending support to the Secretariat of the Taskforce. The Taskforce
has highly evaluated the contribution of the Appellate court judges,
District court judges of the concerned areas, lawyers, government
lawyers, court employees, human rights activists and employees
engaged in quasi-judicial bodies, stakeholders and civil society
members for being present and making contribution during the
discussion. All of them deserve thanks.
I would like to extend heartfelt thanks to the invited member, the Joint
Secretary Mr. Kedar Paudel, Mr. Keshariraj Pandey, the judge of
Appellate Court invited as an expert, the Under Secretaries duo Mr.
Kailash Prasad Subedi and Mr. Basudev Neupane engaged in
preparing the drafts, Section Office Mr. Surendra Kumar Bajracharya,
Mr. Keshav Prasad Dahal, the Project Manager of the Enhancing
Access to Justice Project and other staff.
Finally, I am grateful to all members of the Taskforce for their
untiring hard work and labour during morning, evening and on public
holidays continuously in performing the task entrusted to the
Taskforce on time irrespective of their respective regular professional
and service-related works.
Kathmandu.
August 11, 2010
(Khilaraj Regmi)
Justice, Supreme Court and
Convener, Civil Raw Reform and
Modification Taskforce
Government of Nepal
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
Being a law to regulate day-to-day civil and social relationship among
citizens in any country, civil law is has very crucial role in civil life.
The principles of civil law are being practiced since the very
beginning of human civilization and they are in practice even today in
their modified forms in various legal systems. The Roman law is one
classic example of such vivid realities.
It would not be an overstatement to say that the civil law in Nepal has
come to the present form being developed as a blend of principles of
the ancient Hindu law, the Common law, Continental law and some of
Nepal’s own unique local principles. However, some of the principles
of the civil law of Nepal are being directed by the jurisprudential
principles of civil law and principles laid down by the Supreme Court
rather than by legislation enacted by the legislature. In the context of
the open and market-oriented economy, the obligations arising out of
international treaties to which Nepal is a party and the development of
liberal and democratic society, several principles of the existing civil
law have already been incomplete and irrelevant. To speak truly, there
is lack of proper laws on so many subjects of civil law in Nepal.
In the changed context, reform in the system of governance is one of
the major agendas of the country and law reform has been regarded as
one of its inseparable parts. The government has adopted a policy of
continuing law reform with a view to make the legal system of Nepal
rich, improved, modern and according to needs of 21st century. As a
part of this endeavor, preparation is underway to formulate drafts of
Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code and to introduce them in
Legislature-Parliament in the form of Bills.
As the country has been passing through a transitional phase, it might
be argued that law reform is not a necessity at this difficult stage.
However, this time has to be taken as an opportunity because of the
fact that reform process could be accelerated during difficult times
and desired goals could be achieved, though law reform is a perennial
process and it is ever lasting. For the first time, an effort has been
made for substantial reform of the overall legal system of the country
and if this reform could be transformed into practice, there is no doubt
that the achievements to be derived from it will have long-lasting
place.
The drafts and report prepared by the Taskforce formed by
Government of Nepal for modification and reform of civil law in
Nepal has been submitted to Government of Nepal (Council of
Ministers) and directives has been given to this Ministry to take
necessary actions on it. Once the process of consultation with the
relevant stakeholders is over, these drafts will be forwarded in the
form of Bills. The drafts received from the Taskforce may not be
complete in itself and there may be areas of reform as well. In order to
facilitate the access of the drafts to the stakeholders, the drafts and
report thereof has been uploaded in the website and are being
published in the form of a book. I would like to request all concerned
persons/organizations to render their respective assistance in
additional modification and reform in the drafts.
Kathmandu
October 7, 2010
(Madhab Paudel)
Secretary
Ministry of Law and Justice
ENHANCING ACCESS TO JUSTICE PROJECT
(NEP/08/007)
Remark
Protection and promotion of life, property and liberty of people is the
main goal of the modern constitutionalism. This makes all the three
organs of the state to be accountable to citizens being confined to their
respective limits according to the theory of separation of powers. In
order to implement this, there is the need of promulgation of
constitution and making of laws. Implementation of law is much more
important
enactment.
journey
towards
constitutionalism is not possible unless reforming the old and
inadequate laws having accommodated the new concepts of
jurisprudence developed as per the need of time and in international
level. Reform in existing law is necessary also to institutionalize
political context changed in the country over the last few years.
Having realized the same fact, Government of Nepal has initiated this
effort of reforming civil and criminal laws of the country. Government
of Nepal had formed two taskforces on civil law and criminal law
reform under the convenership of two Justices of the Supreme Court
namely Hon’ble Mr. Khilaraj Regmi and Hon’ble Mr. Kalyan Shrestha
respectively. The Penal Code and Criminal Procedures Code has
already been published and the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code
is on your hand.
Civil law is one of the major charters of relationship among citizens
and between the state and citizen. The family relationship between
persons; property and various aspects associated with it; civil rights;
matters relating to trade and commerce; relationship between person
and state and the procedures to implement those provisions have been
dealt with in the separate drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code. The Civil Procedures Code has been drafted taking
into account of the problems being faced in court procedures and
acknowledging the development taken place in the area of information
technology. An effort has been made in the proposed codes to
modernize the provisions of civil law within and out side the Country
Code.
Finally, I would like to offer my heartfelt thanks to the convener and
members of the Taskforce for their hard works during days and nights
to complete this task. I would also like to express special gratitude to
the JICA and the Japanese Professors for the contribution they have
made. I also would like to thank the Enhancing Access to Justice
Project and its staff for facilitating the Taskforce to complete its task
as the Secretariat.
(Dr. Ramkrishna Timelsena)
National Program Director
Right Hon’ble Prime Minister,
Office of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers,
Singhdurbar, Kathmandu.
Subject Submission of Report
Right Hon’ble Sir,
We do hereby submit the draft of the Civil Code, Civil Procedures Code and
report thereof prepared by the civil law Reform and Modification Task Force as
follows formed by a decision of Government of Nepal (Council of Ministers)
dated December 3, 2008 for reform and modification of civil law of Nepal.
Hon’ble Justice Mr. Khilraj Regmi, Justice, Supreme Court
Convener
Mr. Hari Prasad Neupane, Vice-Chairperson, Nepal Law
Commission
Member
Mr. Madhab Paudel, Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice
Member
Dr. Ram Krishna Timalsena, Registrar, Supreme Court
Member
Mr. Shyam Prasad Kharel, Senior Advocate,
Member
Mr. Ramnath Mainali, Advocate, Representative, Nepal Bar
Association
Member
Ms. Liladevi Gadtaula, Under Secretary (law), Ministry of
Energy
Woman
member
Mr. Kamalshali Ghimire, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Law
and Justice
Membersecretary
The report submitted on this Wednesday, 11th August, 2010.
1. Background:
1.1 Need of Civil Code:
The Muluki Ain enacted for the first time in Nepal in the year
1853 for making provisions of civil law was mainly based on the
Hindu religion and philosophy. The Muluki Ain was amended
from time to time and in the year 1963, a new Muluki Ain
(hereinafter referred to as the “Country Code” in this report)
was enacted. The existing Country Code comprises of
substantive as well as procedural provisions of civil and
criminal laws. Since this Country Code was enacted in special
historical context, it fails to respond to the remarkable
achievements and changes occurred in the open, liberal,
democratic system, economic liberalization, development of
information technology and industrialization in the 21st century.
As this Act could not fulfill the needs of the changed context,
the need for timely reform and codification of civil law was felt
realized long time back; however, the reform and codification
works could not be initiated for a long time.
In order for making new civil law by bringing timely reform in
the prevailing law, one task force was formed under the
convenorship of the then Law Secretary and a draft was
prepared and published. Since that draft was in the preliminary
stage, that draft could not become a law.
Though most of the subject-matters of the civil law prevailing in
the country at present are in the Country Code, however, it
could not have covered all matters of civil law. Some of the
matters of civil law are in use through the interpretation and
judicial principles laid down by of Supreme Court while some of
those matters are being governed by general principles of
jurisprudence. Therefore, in the present changed context, it is
highly necessary to modernize and codify the civil law covering
the matters identified to be reformed, the judicial principles laid
down by the Supreme Court and the values developed in Nepal
by our own practice, the civil law Reform and Improvement
Task Force (herein after referred to as the “Taskforce”) was
formed as follows under the convenorship of a Justice of
Supreme Court according to a decision of Government of Nepal
(Council of Ministers) dated December 3, 2008:-
1. Hon’ble Justice Mr. Khilraj Regmi, Justice,
Supreme Court
Convener
2. Mr. Hari Prasad Neupane, Vice-Chairperson,
Nepal Law Commission
Member
3. Mr. Madhab Paudel, Secretary, Ministry of
Law and Justice
Member
4. Dr.
Krishna
Timalsena,
Registrar,
Supreme Court
Member
5. Mr. Shyam Prasad Kharel, Senior Advocate,
Member
6. Mr.
Ramnath
Mainali,
Advocate,
Representative, Nepal Bar Association
Member
7. Ms. Liladevi Gadtaula, Under Secretary (law),
Ministry of Energy
Woman
member
8. Mr. Kamalshali Ghimire, Joint Secretary,
Ministry of Law and Justice
Membersecretary
Terms of Reference of Taskforce:
The terms of reference of the Taskforce as fixed by Government
of Nepal (Council of Ministers) are as follows:-
To prepare separate drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code by making a timely revision and
reform, in consonance with the sprit of the Republic,
the existing socio-economic and cultural conditions
of the country, of the Civil Code published in 2002
by the Taskforce constituted by Government of
Nepal, and to submit the same to Government of
Nepal;
To determine as to the subjects to be dealt with in
the Civil Code and the subjects to be dealt with in
separate law out of the subjects of the civil law and
to give suggestions to Government of Nepal;
While preparing the drafts of Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, to study on the practices in other
countries about them and to furnish other necessary
suggestions to enrich the Nepali civil law system;
The Taskforce to hold consultation with the
concerned officials of Government of Nepal,
national and foreign experts, lawyers, stakeholders
and civil society,
Before submitting its suggestions together with
report,
Taskforce
consultation
meetings on the drafts with stakeholders and civil
society at regional as well as national level;
The Taskforce may form a drafting sub-committee
under coordination of the Secretary at the Ministry
of Law and Justice and the drafting sub-committee
shall, according to the direction of the Taskforce,
submit the draft of Civil Code and Civil Procedures
Code to the task force;
The terms of the Taskforce shall not exceed one year
from the date of commencement of its works.
Tasks performed by the Taskforce
3.1 The Taskforce initiated its works from March 22, 2009.
The Taskforce had invited former Judge of Appellate Court Mr.
Bodhariraj Pandey as an expert of the civil law, Mr. Kedar
Paudel, Joint Secretary at the Ministry of Law and Justice as
the Support Manager and Mr. Keshav Prasad Dahal, the Project
Manager of the Access to Justice Project as the focal point of
the Taskforce. Similarly, in order to assist in drafting, the
Taskforce had invited Mr. Kailash Subedi and Mr. Bashudev
Neupane, the Under Secretaries duo at the Ministry of Law and
Justice.
Since all the members of the Taskforce are the officials
associated with different service and profession, The Taskforce
had performed its tasks in additional time; the time before or
after office hour and on public holidays. The Taskforce has
prepared the drafts having intense discussions on each of the
topics and had decided the matters unanimously. The
Taskforce has its meetings convened for 103 times to complete
its works.
In the course of performing its works, technical cooperation
was made available by the Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA), Government of Japan. Under this assistance,
the Government of Japan had formed an advisory group
comprising of Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo of the Keio University,
Prof. Satoshi Minamikata of the Niigata University and Prof.
Dr. Hiroyuki Kihara of the Asia University to give feedback to
the Taskforce on civil laws and practices prevailing in Japan
and in other developed countries. Out of the members of the
advisory group, Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo studied the draft and
gave suggestions on the matters of general principles of civil
law, natural and legal persons, bankruptcy of natural person,
property law, and law of torts; Prof. Satoshi Minamikata on the
matters relating to family law and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki Kihara on
the matters relating to law of contract and obligation. Similarly,
Mr. Taro Morinaga, Lecturer at the Ministry of Justice of
Japan had studied and offered comparative analysis of the draft
and provided comments and feedback on the proposed
provisions contained in the draft on private international law.
The Taskforce had had video conferences and direct
discussions with the advisory group time and time and the draft
has been prepared in such a manner that is would be best
suitable and practical in our context.
3.2.The JICA had organized seminars on Civil Code and
related laws in August, 2010 and February 2011 for the
convener, members, support manager and other officers
engaged in the works. In those seminars, discussions were held
with the advisory team members on various provisions of the
Civil Code in reference with the Uniform Commercial Code,
UNDROIT
Principles
International
Commercial
Contracts, 2004 and Civil Code of Japan, 1896. The
suggestions given there have been incorporated in the draft
having considered their relevancy in Nepalese context.
3.3. In connection with preparing the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, preliminary drafts were prepared, massive
suggestions were solicited from stakeholders in order to
improve the drafts. For this purpose, regional seminars were
organized in various geographical regions of the country and
intensive discussions were held on the drafts. For soliciting
suggestions on the preliminary draft of the Civil Code,
seminars were held in Nepalgunj, Janakpur, Butwal and
Biratnagar. Similarly, on the draft of the Civil Procedures
Code, seminars were held in Hetauda and Pokhara. In those
seminars, the Appellate court judges, District court judges of
the concerned areas, lawyers, government lawyers, court
employees, human rights activists and employees engaged in
quasi-judicial bodies, stakeholders and civil society members.
Similarly, two national-level consultative meetings were held
in Kathmandu on the drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code. In the said consultative meetings, Justices of
the Supreme Court, Attorney General, Appellate court judges,
District court judges in the Kathmandu valley, officials of
Nepal Bar Association, senior advocates and advocates, former
judges, government attorneys, Ministry of Law and Justice
officials, NGOs representatives, human rights activists and
staffs engaged in quasi-judicial authorities. Two professors
from Japan, Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo and Prof. Dr. Hiroyuki
Kihara also participated in the national consultative meetings.
Final shape has been given to the drafts of the Civil Code and
Civil Procedures Code having included the suggestions and
feedbacks received from the regional and national consultative
meetings. The final drafts of the Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code have been incorporated in Annex-1 and
Annex-2 respectively.
The speech delivered by Prof. Hiroshi Matsuo has been given
in Annex-3.
Reasons for Reforming civil law:
Legal system of Nepal, particularly, civil law system of Nepal is
in very primitive stage. The principles in the field of civil law
developed in other countries could not have got any space in
Nepal law. There have been significant changes in political and
social sectors in Nepal, but the scattered civil law provisions
could not have addressed the needs of changes and open market
economy. On the one hand, civil law of the country is scattered
in a traditional manner while on the other, so many of the legal
provisions are not complete in themselves. As a result, so many
of the important principles, values and provisions of civil law
are confined only as the matters of academic discourse in our
legal system.
civil law is the backbone of strengthening of an open, liberal
and market-oriented economy. It cannot be forgotten that in
developed countries, civil law has promoted market economy.
As the society has been moving towards modernity from
traditional system, it is necessary to codify and modernize civil
law accordingly. Because of the liberal economic system the
country has adopted, it is the high time for us to modernize and
reform civil law also to respond to the needs of collaboration
and transactions with other countries. Nepal has to start the
journey of codification of laws having regard to the facts that
the countries which were not in favour of codification
traditionally have codifying their laws. It is in this background
that Government of Nepal has pursued the policy of reforming
civil law of Nepal by enacting Civil Code and Civil Procedures
Code.
Codification of law means inclusion in a single legislation the
legal principles, values and provisions in a particular area (such
as civil, criminal law and so on) in a well-managed order and to
enforce them. From the process of codification, not only the
laws will be codified, they will be simple, easily understandable
and logical and it would contribute in making a complete law.
With reference to civil law, codification is required for the
following reasons:-
(1) Since civil law is the charter of civic relationship in
any society and since it has the ownership of citizen, it
is desirable to have included all general principles of
civil law in one Code to the extent possible;
(2) Civil law contributes in development of jurisprudence
of the nation which enriches national law, thus, it is
necessary to have separate Code on civil matters;
(3) Not only the making of Civil Code will modernize our
legal system, it will also respond to the open market
policies adopted by other countries, thus, Civil Code is
required;
(4) Civil Code could be developed as a means of
promoting national integrity as having a uniform Civil
Code and to enforce it would be effective bedrock for
consolidating national unity.
Purposes of the Civil Code:
Making of and amendment to law is an inseparable part of social
development process. The Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code
have to be taken as tools of promoting national integration, as
means
developing
Nepalese
jurisprudence,
cornerstones of modernization of law in Nepal. Since civil law
uses to have a very close relationship with living style of every
citizen of a country, this is called as the citizen’s charter and it
is one of the major tools of solving day-to-day problems of
people in general. It is believed that the proposed Codes, which
have been prepared with inclusion of scattered principles and
provisions of civil laws along with those not yet developed in
the country, would play a significant role in responding to the
ever increasing needs of managing legal relationships in society
thereby massively managing civic obligation and protecting
rights and interests of general people.
Proposed
legal
provisions,
their
bases
drafting
methodology of the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code:
6.1 The prevailing Country Code and other laws on relevant
subjects have been taken as the main bases of the proposed Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code. The legal principles the
country has practiced over the last one hundred and fifty years
in the area of civil law have been given room in both of the
Codes either as they are or in their improved forms. Necessary
provisions of civil law have been proposed in both Codes having
regard to our geographical, ethnic, religious and cultural
diversity. Also an effort has been made to include the principles
and precedents laid down and by the Supreme Court from time
to time and being recognized and used in the field of civil law
like legal provisions. The legal principles recognized in the
jurisprudence of the country but having no legal provisions to
backup them (such as principles relating to persons) are
responded to along with concepts and required legal provisions.
Similarly, the concepts which have been clearly recognized in
our laws but not in practice (such as trusts or Guthee) have been
proposed as new legal provisions with timely changes and
reforms.
6.2 While preparing the proposed Civil Code and Civil
Procedures Code, Civil Codes in various countries have also
been studied. Since the codification of civil law is mainly the
product of continental legal system, the Taskforce has taken
into account of the Codes prevailing in the countries which have
been adopting the same legal system such as France, Germany,
Japan, the Philippines and Quebec province in Canada. However,
the provisions contained in those Codes could not be borrowed
and implemented as such having regard to special social,
economic and cultural traditions in our country. Despite of this
fact, in Nepal, there is the lack of so many of significant civil
law provisions prevailing and practiced in countries having the
history of codification for the last two hundred years (such as
France) and if such provisions could be introduced in our
country with special reference of our context, it would enrich
our legal system. Therefore, some of such provisions have been
proposed.
6.3 Some of the legal principles of civil law which have been in
practice in Nepal without any written and elaborative legal
provisions to back them have been given space in the Civil Code
and elaborated. Such provisions includes provisions relating to
maternal and paternal authority, guardianship, curatorship,
leasing contracts, hire and purchase contracts, servitude which
are in seldom use in Nepal without adequate legal provisions
and having regard to the same, provisions have been made in
detail in the Civil Code to provide adequate backup for them.
Until now, the matters relating to inter-country adoption are
being governed by the Country Code Chapter on Adoption and
the Terms and Procedures framed by Government of Nepal,
under the powers made in the Country Code. Having regard to
this fact, the provisions concerning inter-country adoption have
to be made as part of substantial law in the proposed Civil Code
specially in the context where Nepal is going to be a party to the
Hague Convention on Inter-Country Adoption. In addition to
this, an effort has been made to include in these Codes the
provisions made in the treaties to which Nepal is a party
(specially related to human rights) in such a manner that they
may not be inconsistent with the provisions hade in such human
rights instruments. Since the country does not have any
provision concerning private international law, an effort has also
been made in the Civil Code to incorporate within it some of the
provisions relating to private international law. Moreover, some
of the fundamental principles of civil law which have been
introduced and in practice in other countries but not provided
for in law of Nepal (such as usufruct, testamentary will and
other will, parents and children relationship, unjust enrichment
and so on) have been dealt with in separate Chapter each.
6.4 So far as the Civil Procedures Code is concerned, the
proposed draft contains the procedures of civil cases prevailing
in the country in a logical order. However, an effort has been
made to reform the existing lengthy and cumbersome procedures
of litigation process and to make them timely and it is expected
that the proposed Code will substantially improve the court
procedures and hearing of cases. From the procedural point of
view, some new provisions have been introduced in the Code
about which detail elaboration has been made in Paragraph 8
below.
6.5 While drafting the Civil Code and Civil Procedures Code,
our existing drafting style and methodology based on common
law system have been followed. Separate matters of civil law
have been presented in separate chapters treating each of them
as a branch of civil law. The chapters have been chosen based
on the need of each of the subject-matters. In each of the
chapters, sections and sub-sections have been given as may be
necessary.
Contents of the Civil Code:
Though the Taskforce has taken the preliminary draft of
the Civil Code prepared in 2006 as its basis of works at the time
of commencement of its business, the contents of the Civil Code
has been designed also having regard to the laws, practices and
experiences of other countries as well. The proposed Code
consists of following subject-matters in the following six parts,
52 chapters and 751 sections. If the Code is passed by the
Legislature-Parliament and authenticated in its present form, it
is sure that it will be the longest ever Act in the country. It is
contextual to share here that in other countries as well (such as
France, Germany, Japan, the Philippines and Cubec province in
Canada), Civil Code is used to be the longest law.

Part-1
Preliminary (divided in three chapters and 29
sections)

Part-2
Laws Concerning Persons (divided in three
chapters and 22 sections)

Part-3
Family Law (divided in 12 chapters and 218
sections)

Part-4
Property Law (divided in 15 chapters and 251
sections)

Part-5
Concerning
contract
other
obligations (divided in 18 chapters and 200
sections)

Part-6
Private International Law (one Chapter and 31
sections)
In the first part of the Civil Code, the subjects such as
preliminary provisions, general principles of civil law, and
civil rights have been proposed. The provisions of this
Code have been treated as general law and it is provided
that if there is any special law on any specific subjectmatter, the provisions of the special law shall prevail on
such matters and this Code will not affect on such
provisions. Like general principles of criminal justice in
jurisprudence, the universally accepted principles of civil
law and principles determined by the Supreme Court in
Nepal have been dealt with in a separate Chapter as
general principles of civil law. This Chapter deals with the
some prevailing general principles of civil law such as
ignorance of law not to be an excuse, wrongdoer to bear
damages, no benefit out of wrongdoing, civil liability not
to be exempted and act against law to be invalid. Under
the Chapter on civil rights in this part, provisions such as
prohibition in discrimination, special measures not to be
taken as discrimination, inviolability of right to privacy
have been made in addition to new provision that if any
one has violated a civil right of anyone and has caused
loss or if some one is about to violate such right, the
aggrieved party may submit a petition to District court as
well in addition to Appellate court and the concerned court
may issue preventive or directive order as it may deem
necessary. There was a long debate among members of the
Taskforce as to whether or not to have the separate
Chapter for civil rights and finally, it was settled by
consensus based on the practice of some of the countries
that it be dealt with as a separate Chapter.
The second part of the Civil Code deals with legal
provisions relating to persons. There are three chapters in
this part viz. natural person, legal person and bankruptcy
of a natural person. Though law of person is not new in
the Nepalese jurisprudence, however, the Code for the first
time has proposed separate provisions as laws of person.
The legal capacity of natural persons has been classified in
three stages as full legal capacity, partial legal capacity
and incapacity. Though unsoundness of mind has been
frequently used in our legal context, no provisions have
been made with regard to its definition and legal status.
Under the provisions relating to legal person, new
provisions have been proposed such as the conditions in
which a legal person acquires legal capacity, the works
legal person is capable of doing, provisions relating to
some entities that acquire legal personality on its own,
operation and management of legal persons, and directors
of legal persons not to take decisions on matters having
conflict with their interests. Since there is separate
Insolvency Act, 2006 in force with regard to corporate
insolvency, this part deals only with bankruptcy of natural
person alone.
The third part of the Code comprises of different chapters
on provisions relating to family law. The principles of
civil nature elaborated in the Chapters on Marriage and on
Husband and Wife of the existing Country Code have been
proposed in this part as three chapters viz. Marriage,
Effects of Marriage and Divorce. Other provisions
proposed in this part includes provisions on Relationship
between parents and children; maternal and parental
authority; guardianship; curatorship; domestic adoption
inter-country adoption; partition of property; testamentary
will and succession. Though some of the provisions
proposed in the Code are prevailing at present, however,
those provisions are not timely and having regard to
directive orders issued by the Supreme Court on marriage
and divorce, effort has been made to reform and improve
those provisions with a view to maintain gender equality.
The current provisions of registering marriage at Office of
Local Registrar and District Administration Office have
been changed and new provision of registering marriage at
District Court has been proposed considering the
prevailing international practices as well. Under the
Chapter on relationship between parents and children, new
provision of claiming of child within two years of the birth
has been proposed. In the Chapter on legal capacity,
priority order of the persons to be a guardian of the quasicompetent person has been stated and new provision of
conferring guardianship to the organization that is taking
custody of children. In the Chapter on curatorship,
provision have been proposed that in case there is no
guardian of any person, any one can be appointed as
his/her curator and curator may hold and take care of
property of such a person.
The traditional provisions relating to adoption in Nepal are
associated with Hindu principles and property though
there are significant changes going on in practice. Because
of influence of Hindu law, there is a provision that no
person having a son may adopt a son and no person having
a daughter may adopt a daughter. This traditional approach
to adoption has been changed and it is proposed that if the
concerned person is financially capable, a court may allow
him/her to adopt a son even if he/she is having a son or
daughter even if he/she is having a daughter. This
provision has been proposed because the absolute
traditional provision of prohibiting adoption of a son if
one is having a son and of a daughter if one is having a
daughter may not be relevant in the present context.
Similarly, the present provision of getting the deed of
adoption registered at Land Revenue Office like any deed
of property transaction has been proposed to be changed
and it is proposed that such deed has to be certified from
District Court as it is a matter relating to legal capacity of
person rather than a property transaction. In addition, a
new provision has been proposed that if the separated
husband and wife start to live together again, the son or
daughter adopted earlier by either of them shall belong to
both of them. Normally, age of the person adopted as son
or daughter should be below the age of fourteen years,
however, it is proposed as new provision that within the
relationship of three generations, the said age bar is not
applicable so that even the matured person of old age
could become an adopted son or adopted daughter. Since
Nepal is a signatory to the Hague Convention on
Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of
Inter-country Adoption concluded in 1993 and the country
is in the process of being a party to it, it is necessary to
separate
Chapter
Inter-country
Adoption,
therefore, some necessary provisions have been made in
consistence with the convention.
In so many countries in the world, there is no provision of
partition of family property and the owner of property may
transfer the property to the person he/she wills. However,
having regard to Nepal’s economic, social and cultural
aspects, the existing provisions of partition of parental
property is left continued. However, this provision leads
the children to remain dependent to paternal property. This
law is in practice in Nepal for centuries and it is seen to be
a natural right of children. Thus, it is not possible for the
time being to introduce the will system substituting the
partition of property. Rather, it is proposed that the will
system be introduced after the interval of certain time, i.e
from the 1st of Baisakh, 2080 (corresponding to April 13,
2023) replacing the current partition of property system.
Since the provision of taking costs for life maintenance
(jiuni) and expenses for marriage seem to be irrelevant and
impracticable, it is proposed to repeal such provisions.
The fourth part of the Code deals with law of property
which contains 15 chapters and such as provisions as to
ownership of property, possession, definition and use of
government,
public
private
property
provisions which are in practice in Nepal either directly or
indirectly but not being recognized conceptually such as
usufruct, servitude, land cultivation and prescription,
house rent, trusts, acquisition and transfer of property,
mortgage of immovable property, registration of deeds,
donation, and financial transaction have been proposed.
On the one hand, this Chapter integrates and brings timely
changes in the related legal provisions prevailing in the
existing Country Code, the Land Revenue Act, 1977 and
the Land Survey and Measurement Act, 1963 while on the
other, the new concepts such as usufruct and servitude
have been proposed to be introduced in the Nepalese legal
system to enrich our legal system.
Under the provisions of property, definitions of movable,
immovable, personal, common, and joint ownership
property have been given and according to principles laid
down by the Supreme Court, new provision to regard the
property personally earned by father and mother as the
common property of the family has been added. Under
government, public and private property, additional
provisions as to definition, use and protection of such
property have been made. According to the newly emerged
concept of property in the process of social development,
the concept of community property has been proposed.
Provision of trust to allow property in one’s ownership
and possession to be managed and operated for the
benefits of the beneficiaries has been proposed. The
current practice of trusts is proposed to be continued under
the law of trust of common law system.
The fifth part of the Code consists of proposed provisions
relating to contracts and other obligations. Divided in
eighteen chapters, this part includes law relating to general
provisions relating to obligation, conditions for formation
of contracts, validity of contracts, performance of
contracts, breach and remedies for breach of contracts,
sales of goods contracts, contracts of guarantee, bailment
contracts, contracts of mortgage and collateral security,
agency contracts, transport of goods contracts, lease
contracts, hire purchase contracts, indirect and quasicontracts, unjust enrichment, torts, defective products
liability, and works and wages. In this part, on the one
hand, the existing laws on contract have been consolidated
and inadequate provisions have been improved while on
the other, new concepts in our context such as unjust
enrichment, torts, defective products liability have been
incorporated. Mainly, the law of contracts has been
improved according to some of the provisions of
UNDROIT
Principles
International
Commercial
Contracts, 2004 and Uniform Commercial Code. It could
be a matter of further debate in the future whether or not a
separate commercial Code will be required once the Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code are in enforcement. So
many of the countries such as France, Spain, Switzerland,
Japan are having separate commercial Code while there is
only one civil and commercial Code in the Netherlands.
The Chapter on lease investment which is in the
preliminary stage of draft has been excluded from this
Code and it is recommended to incorporate it in
commercial Code or to enact a separate law for it.
The Chapter 6th of the Code comprises provisions relating
to private international law. The private international law
mainly deals with conflicts of law and such disputes are
mainly related to civil law matters. As this concept is law
is at the infancy stage in Nepal, it is proposed to
incorporate such provisions in a separate Chapter in the
Civil Code.
The New Legal Principles proposed in the Civil Code and its
bases and causes:
The following new provisions introduced in the existing civil
law and those improved in the existing law are as follows:-
New Provision to Presumption of Death of a Person:
As the current law provision (Section 32 of the Evidence
Act, 1974) of regarding the person disappeared for the last
twelve years without notice to be dead normally seems to
be appropriate, it is proposed to be continued. However, if
this twelve years clause is made applicable even with
regard to the extremely old person or a person deputed to a
war zone or person met with an accident, it would be not
rational. Thus, the Taskforce has proposed new provision
in this regard having studied such provisions in other
countries. Since the average maximum age of a person is
not more than 100 years, it would not be appropriate to
presume that if a person of 95 years disappears, he/she
would be presumed to be dead only after 12 years.
Similarly, if there is a clear evidence that a person is
deputed to a war zone or he/she has met with an accident,
it would not be appropriate to presume such person to be
dead only after a long period of 12 years. Therefore, new
provision has been proposed that if no normal information
is received with regard to a disappeared person who is of
80 years or more or who is deputed to a war zone or who
has met with an accident is not surviving for a period of
five years, four years and three years respectively, the
person so disappeared will be presumed to be dead.
Detail provision as to legal person:
Though the concept of legal person is not new in
jurisprudence, there is no provision in general law as to
the status of legal person. With regard to legal person, a
new Chapter has been made providing that legal
personality will be acquired only after getting registered
with a competent authority and after registration; such
person will acquire corporate personality. In addition,
matters as to acquisition and exercise of rights by such
authorities, decision-making authority within them and
consequences of their dissolution have also been made in
the proposed Code.
New Concept in Bankruptcy law:
According to the prevailing law on bankruptcy, it is not
clear how long will the status of bankruptcy of a person
declared to be bankrupt last. Since this non-clarity it must
be supposed that a person declared to be bankrupt would
remain bankrupt for an indefinite period of time. However,
as this provision is not appropriate from the human right
point of view as well, it requires a fresh look for reform.
Thus, it has been proposed that a person declared to be
bankrupt from a court will last for a period of 12 years and
after that period, he/she would be treated as if he/she is
not declared bankrupt.
New provision in family law:
Some new dimension in family law have been proposed in
the Nepali jurisprudence. According to the proposed
provision, marriage registration is being gradually made
mandatory, new provision as to relationship between
father, mother and children, paternal and maternal
authority, and provision relating to guardianship and
curatorship. Though these concepts are not new in
Nepalese society, the legal provisions as such are new.
Provisions concerning testamentary will:
The provision of will of one’s own title or ownership is
not new concept in the Nepalese law. The deed of will
with immediate effect (halaiko bakas patra) or deed of
will to be effective after death (sheshpachhiko bakas
patra) are the mechanism by which the system of will is
being practiced to some extent. However, so long as the
present provision of partition of parental property
continues, deed of will with immediate effect or deed of
will to be effective after death could be implemented
subject to the partition of property. So far as the question
of provision relating to will system is concerned, parental
property or property acquired by a person has to be
disposed of after death of such person according to the
deed of will he/she has executed.
According to traditional concept of will, if it is proved that
a person has executed a deed of will; formal procedures
concerning it are of least significance. However, in the
present time when honesty and moral values are decaying,
it would not be prudent to leave the execution of deed of
will open. Therefore, it is proposed that such a deed of
will has to be certified by certain authority for its
authenticity purpose, and for that Land Revenue Office,
Embassy or Consulate general in abroad or a notary public
are proposed as the entities to certify the execution of such
deeds.
Provisions concerning Usufruct:
The provision of getting benefit or advantage from
somebody
else’s
property
without
transferring
ownership of such property is one of the major aspects of
civil law and it is being practiced to some extent in Nepal
as well. However, as there is no legal and institutional
arrangement made in Nepali jurisprudence in this regard,
legal provision concerning usufruct has been proposed.
From this provision, movable or immovable property will
be mobilized to the optimum extent that accelerates
economic activities. Thus, this concept has special
importance in a market economy. From provision of
usufruct, any person may handover property under his/her
title and ownership to any one else for certain period for
prescription. It is the expectation of the Taskforce that it
will accelerate economic activities by way of optimum
mobilization of property.
Provisions concerning servitude:
Concept of servitude with reference to use of private
property is not new in Nepalese society, though its use has
been very narrowly confined. This does not cover the
whole concept of servitude or easement prevailing in other
countries. Having regard to the sane fact, the Taskforce
has proposed to include in Nepali jurisprudence the
concept of servitude in the use or prescription of
immovable property and has proposed a separate Chapter
for its practical use.
Hire purchase contract and lease contracts:
Though the Contract Act, 1999 had given a new dimension
to the literature of Nepali law with regard to general and
special provisions of contract, it could not have covered
within it hire purchase contract and lease contract. Hire
purchase contract is one of the major means of market
economy under which the goods sold by a seller to the
buyer is, until full payment of the goods so sold is paid,
deemed to be let to the buyer by the seller and ownership
of the goods will be transferred to the buyer once the full
price of the goods is paid. Though this provision is not
there in the Nepali law, it is being governed by general
previsions made in contract. Thus, a new Chapter has been
proposed for this purpose.
So far as provision of lease contract is concerned, this is
letting immovable property for a long time and which is
different from house rent.
Provisions concerning torts:
Though there is no separate law of torts in Nepal, however,
it is not the case that there was no use of tortuous liability
in Nepal. Requirement of payment of damages for loss of
crops by cattle (bali armal) is one of such example.
Nonetheless, there has been on formal use of the word tort
in any Nepal law. Duskriti may not be the actual
translation of the English word “tort.” Nevertheless, this
word has been in the use in the Nepali legal field, the
Taskforce has used the word Duscriti in its original form.
8.10 Provisions concerning Private International Law:
Though transactions and relationship of Nepal and Nepali
people with foreign counties and foreign citizens and
corporate bodies on various subjects of civil nature are on
the rise, there are no provisions relating to private
international law in the Nepal law to regulate such
matters; therefore, a separate Chapter has been proposed
in Part 6 of the proposed Civil Code. Though the proposed
provisions could not respond to all the subjects of private
international law prevailing in international practice, basic
essential principles have been proposed in this Chapter.
One question may be raised as to need of incorporation of
provisions of private international law in the Civil Code
itself. This is one important and relevant question of
codification of law. There is no uniformity in other
countries having codification of civil law. However, as the
Civil Codes of Italy, of Russian Federation, of Vietnam
and of the Quebec province of Canada are having a
separate Chapter on private international law, it is felt
appropriate to incorporate it in the proposed Civil Code.
Civil Procedures Code:
The Civil Procedures Code determined the procedures to be
followed for settlement of disputes of civil nature and it none of
the significant aspects of civil law administration. Even in the
countries not having separate Civil Code (such as India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan) were having Civil Procedures Code since
1908 and the need was felt in Nepal as well long time back.
Though efforts were made in the past also to draft Civil
Procedures Code, there was no publication of an integrated draft
prepared and published. Thus, it has to be taken as the first step
in this regard. The proposed Code consists of 23 chapters, 290
sections and 30 schedules, the details of which are as follows:-

Chapter-1
Preliminary
3 sections

Chapter-2
General principles of Civil Procedures
12 sections

Chapter-3
Provisions concerning Jurisdiction
12 sections

Chapter-4
Provisions
concerning
procedures
preparation of documents
19 sections

Chapter-5
Provisions concerning limitation
16 sections

Chapter-6
Provisions concerning court fees
22 sections

Chapter-7
Provisions concerning statement of claims
and claims
14 sections

Chapter-8
Provisions
concerning
summons
service of summons
20 sections

Chapter-9
Provisions concerning statement of defense
and counter claims
7 sections

Chapter-10
Provisions concerning endorsement
5 sections

Chapter-11
Provisions concerning preliminary hearing
4 sections

Chapter-12
Provisions concerning date for appearing in
courts
14 sections

Chapter-13
Provisions concerning power of attorneys
12 sections

Chapter-14
Provisions
concerning
interlocutory
interim order
5 sections

Chapter-15
Provisions
concerning
examination
documentary evidences
18 sections

Chapter-16
Provisions
concerning
examination
witnesses
11 sections

Chapter-17
Provisions concerning hearing of cases and
judgment
11 sections

Chapter-18
Suspension and transfer of cases
4 sections

Chapter-19
Provisions concerning appeal
14 sections

Chapter-20
Provisions concerning review and revision
3 sections

Chapter-21
Provisions
concerning
mutual
legal
assistance
16 sections

Chapter-22
Execution of judgments
25 sections

Chapter-23
Miscellaneous provisions
23 sections
Mainly, the current draft has accommodated the procedures of civil
nature in the Country Code with necessary modification and reform
and in so many subjects, procedural provisions have been made in
order to make proceedings and settlement of civil cases simple,
transparent, predictable and more practical. The main provisions
proposed in this Code and the rationale behind them are as follows:-
Coverage of procedures:
The proposed procedures code has been designed in such a way
that both judicial and quasi-judicial authorities to try cases of
civil nature may invoke it. Accordingly, the words like court and
judge have been defined.
Nature of the Code:
This procedures code has been proposed as General Code of
procedures. If there is a separate civil procedures are provided
in the prevailing law, it shall be according to that law and in
other matters it shall be according to this Code.
Clear demarcation of civil and criminal cases:
Though No. 9 of the existing Country Code has classified civil
and criminal cases, its use has raised some non-clarity in
practice and some of the civil nature cases are being registered
in criminal record. Clear demarcation has been made to end this
anomaly. This would end the current trend of registering civil
nature cases such as divorce in the criminal record.
General principles of civil procedures
In Chapter 2 of the proposed Code, some of the general
principles of civil procedures have been identified and
mandatory provision of compliance of these principles in the
proceedings of cases of civil nature by judicial and quasijudicial authorities. It has been expected that these provisions
will facilitate even the quasi-judicial bodies to hear and decide
cases.
Most of the principles elaborated here are, normally, in our
practice but some of them are new provisions proposed. Among
the proposed principles, all parties to a dispute in a court
including Government of Nepal have to be treated equally and
they will have the same capacity. However, if a separate law has
afforded special treatment or discount to Government of Nepal
or any other person (such as in case of court fee, locus standi
and so on), it shall be accordingly. Similarly, it is proposed that
a civil case may be compromised at any stage or any court and
that one level appeal is a matter of right.
Court fee
The procedures code includes provision to clarify jurisdiction,
limitation
court
which
vital
subjects
administration of justice. The provision made in the existing
Court Fees Act, 1960 have been modified according to necessity
and the English words used in the Act have been converted into
Nepali language as Adalati shulka.
New provision of counter claim and defendant:
The existing scattered provisions relating to statement of claims
and statement of defense have been included in one Act and
proposed to make them simple. In addition, the following new
previsions are also made:-
(a) The current law of filing another statement of claims to
make any new claims while filing statement of defense
against the claim made in the statement of claims has
been modified and it is proposed as new provision that
counter-claims may be made in the statement of defense
itself. In such situation, the defendant must pay court fee
according to the amount claimed in such counter-claims.
(b) Though there is legal provision at present in No. 139 of
the Chapter on Court Proceedings, the Country Code that
a court may hear the person who is not made as party to a
case but who has been implicated in the case or
compliant and he/she may be made a party to the case.
But a person who is not implicated in case could not be
made a party. This law is proposed to be changed and
propose that though not implicated in a case, if right,
interests, claim or concern of a person are related in a
case, if the concerned person makes a request for it if the
court finds it appropriate, such a person may be made as
a party to such a case.
Provisions concerning preliminary hearing
According to the existing law, even if the defendant has made
claims that the plaintiff has no locus standi, that the statement of
claims is not filed within the limitation, or that the court in
which the case has been filed has no jurisdiction to try such a
case, these preliminary questions are not settled first and the
case-proceedings go on and finally, the cases are decided based
on these preliminary cases after so many years. If such
provisions are not improved, effectiveness of court proceedings
may be questioned and it would promote vexatious litigation. In
order to reform this situation, it is proposed that court must
settle this question before examining evidences and preliminary
hearing should be conducted for that purpose. It is proposed that
through preliminary hearing, the statement of claims will be
dismissed if there is no jurisdiction, locus standi or limitation.
provisions
concerning
submitting
statement of claims and service of summons:
In the proposed Code, the existing provisions with regard to
service of summons have been continued with necessary
modifications. The proposed new provision in this regard is that
if the plaintiff himself/herself desires to deliver the statement of
claims along with summons of the court, he/she may deliver
them and in the case of legal persons, the plaintiff
himself/herself has to deliver the summons. Since this provision
has been already introduced in the Arbitration Act, 1999, it
could be made applicable to all suits of civil nature. Moreover,
it is also proposed that the summon in name of the officials,
legal practitioners, witnesses, power of attorneys who appear in
the court or a party which is engaged in litigation in the same
court may be delivered to him/her at the time of his/her presence
at the court and in case he/she denies in the delivery, the judge
may prohibit him/her in other proceedings in the court.
Reform in getting extension of elapsed time limit or due
The existing provision made in No. 59 of the Chapter on Court
Proceedings, the Country Code provides that the elapsed timelimit may be extended for three times not exceeding 30 days in
total. It is causing delay in hearing and settlement of cases. The
existing provision was made in the specific context of lacking
communication and transportation facilities in the distant past
and as there has been remarkable progress in communication
and transport, the provision of extension of time limit for three
times not exceeding 30 days in total is not justifiable. As this
provision requires a review, it is proposed that time-limit may
be expanded up to a period of 21 days for two times only.
9.10 Use of video conference may be allowed:
It is proposed in the procedures code that in case a party submits
an application requesting to examine a witness who could not
appear at the court for any special reason through video
conference, the witness examination may be conducted through
video conference.
9.11 Provisions concerning mutual legal assistance:
Though No. 34 of the Chapter on Court Proceedings, the
Country Code provides that service in abroad of summons,
notice or closed-questions issued by courts of Nepal and service
in Nepal of summons, notice or closed-questions issued by a
foreign court shall be according to Rules made by Government
of Nepal, however, no such Rules could have been framed so far,
and that particular Number has not been implemented. Since
Nepal’s transactions with foreign countries is on the rise day-byday and since a large number of Nepali people have been living
abroad, it is necessary to have legal provisions for service of
summons used by courts in Nepal in abroad, witnesses to be
examined and judgments delivered in abroad to be executed in
Nepal, therefore, some legal provisions have been made for the
same purpose.
proposed
provisions
based
following
conventions:-
The Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial
and Extra-Judicial Documents in Civil and Commercial
Matters, 1965
The Hague Convention on the Tasting and Evidence
Abroad in Civil and Commercial Matters, 1970
Hague
Convention
Recognition
Enforcement
Foreign
Judgments
Civil
Commercial Matters, 1971
9.12 Speedy execution of judgment
Execution of judgment is one of the crucial aspects of
administration of justice. Judgments of courts will be
meaningless if they are not enforced on time. Unless and until
judgments are enforced in a simple and easy manner, people in
general could not feel to get justice. The ultimate realization of
effectiveness of a decision or final order of a court is possible
only through execution of judgment. As the Taskforce was of
the view that execution of judgment in simple, easy and speedy
manner itself is a realization of justice and the procedures
relating to execution of justice have to be dealt with in the Civil
Procedures, the Taskforce has prepared the draft taking into
special account of creation of machinery for execution of
judgments. In order to execute judgments in simple, easy and
speedy manner, it is proposed that after preparation of judgment,
the court should send the record thereof to the Judgment
Execution Section immediately and a separate case-file and
record of judgment has to be sent to the concerned District
Court for execution.
In order to avoid delay in execution of judgment after the
verdict and in order to execute judgment by way of compromise
or reconciliation, new procedures have been proposed so that
parties to a case may get the judgment executed by making a
joint petition to the court for that purpose.
9.13 Procedures for partition of property
The current No. 46 of the Chapter on Partition, the Country
Code, provides that a petition shall be filed within three years
from the date of decision for partition of property. There is no
limitation fixed to file a suit for partition of property. However,
in case of effecting the partition, a long period of three years is
prescribed. The Supreme Court has also interpreted that if no
petition is filed within the said time, partition need not be
effected.
Clause (4) of Article 20 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal
provides that a son and a daughter shall have equal right in
partition of property and a getting a share from partition of
family property has been accepted as one of the natural rights
and a right at birth. It is the view of the Taskforce that so long
as the provision of partition of family property continues, on one
should be deprived from a share of property through any
technical basis.
In the context of difficulties faced by courts in executing
judgments in partition of property cases and having regard to the
increasing flow of such cases in courts, the Taskforce has
proposed that if the parties to a suit for partition of property are
on due date to appear at the court, the judgment shall be
executed within three months. If there are more than one coparceneres and one of the co-parceners does not present at the
court, a 15-day notice shall be sent to him/her and if all coparceners present, partition of property shall be effected then
and there.
Similarly, if not all co-parceners present at the court, it is
proposed that the court shall separate the share of partition
property of the person who is not present at the court. It is also
proposed that if the statement of property at the time of partition
is not exact, the value of the shortfall property shall be
determined and it shall be reimbursed from the property of the
person providing the share of property or the person taking
custody of the property.
9.14 Guardian may with permission of court file a case:
It is proposed that in order to protect rights of the person who is
a minor according to the law, old, blind or incapable of speaking,
or having unsound mind, the guardian may file a suit or submit
statement of defense, appeal or a petition on behalf of such a
person with an approval of the court. This would relieve courts
from unnecessary backlog of cases and people will get justice on
time.
Suggestions concerning policy and institutional reform to be
made in civil law:
Though necessary provisions have been proposed in the Civil
Code and Civil Procedures Code for reform in the existing laws,
however, the following recommendations have been made for
strengthening civil law by effective implementation of the
proposed Codes:-
(1) As per the practice until now, the Nepal law has not
accepted the requirement of registration of marriage as a
mandatory act as provided in civil laws of other countries.
If the act of registration of marriage has to be left as a
voluntary act, the act of getting marriage concluded will
be a never-ending job. According to para (2) of Article 16
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, 1979, to which Nepal is a
party, it is mandatory to register every marriage in a
register to be maintained for that purpose. In order to
implement this provision as well, registration of marriage
must be made mandatory in our country. Therefore, it is
proposed in the Code that in whatsoever manner may a
marriage be solemnized, such marriage has to be
registered in order to get legal validity. In order to fully
implement this provision, Government of Nepal should
raise public awareness massively through mass media and
local bodies and civil society should also develop the
marriage registration system as a necessary condition of
matrimonial life. It is the expectation of the Taskforce that
it would further promote the legal status of women. It is
also recommended to make necessary legal provision that
a non-registered marriage will not have legal validity by
being a party to the Convention on Consent to Marriage,
Minimum Age to Marriage and Registration of Marriage,
1965.
(2) The Chapter on lease investment which was in the Civil
Code published in 2006 has been excluded from the
proposed Code. It is the view of the Taskforce that time
has not been matured enough for the concept of lease
investment, which is distinct from day-to-day matter of
civic relationship, to be included in the civil law. However,
it is not the view of the Taskforce that there is no need of
lease investment law in the country. The Taskforce is of
the view that such a law must be incorporated in bank and
financial institutions law rather than in the Civil Code.
(3) According
suggestions
received
regional
consultation meetings held in various regions and national
consultation, the provisions concerning partition of
property have been reviewed and provisions to transfer
property through will system has been proposed. Though it
is easy to make laws relating to will, it is very difficult to
move society forward from the centuries old tradition of
sons and daughters to have rights in shares of family
property from father or husband through partition of
property. In a society like our where education is not wellavailable and opportunities of employment are very
minimal, it would be difficult for people to earn a means
of livelihood if a share of property is not received from
father or husband. Irrespective of that fact, it is necessary
to relieve society from the traditional principle of partition
of property and to allow people to dispose of their
property according to their will thereby changing the
traditional style of being dependent on paternal property.
This has to be started from a particular point of time. Thus,
the Taskforce has proposed that this system be introduced
with effect from the 1st of Baisakh, 2080 (corresponding to
April 13, 2023). To materialize this provision the state
should provide free and compulsory and vocational
education, create more and more opportunities of
employment, and make people to rely more on hard-work
and labour. We recommend to Government of Nepal to
take measures in this regard.
Once the two Codes are brought into force, it is sure that
new dimension will begin in Nepal but as the courts will
have extra functions to carry on (marriage registration,
appointment of guardians and curators and registration of
deeds of adoption), the existing number of staff of District
Court and budget will be insufficient. If there is no
efficient human resources in judiciary, it could hardly be
expected that even a good law may deliver good results.
Therefore, the existing staffing of courts must be reviewed,
judges and support staff must be trained and physical
capacity must be enhanced such as audio-visual aids.
As the current trends show, the condition of judgment
execution is not satisfactory. If judgments of courts are
not enforced on time, it will be meaningless. Unless and
until judgments are enforced in a simple and easy manner,
people in general could not feel to get justice. Taking into
account of this fact, this Code has proposed some new
procedures. In order to implement this provision in
practice, the Taskforce recommends Government of Nepal
to establish a mechanism comprising of experienced and
appropriate human resources.
It is already stated that civil law is a matter of concern and
interest for general people, it must be revised from time to
time. Law will be developed and people will feel
ownership of the policies adopted by the state only if civil
laws are reformed according to the policies adopted by the
state. Therefore, it is recommended to Government of
Nepal to form a Taskforce to review the whole civil law of
the country with a view to bringing timely changes in
them.
Civil law Reform and Modification Task Force, 2008
Contents

Part 1
Preliminary
Preamble

Chapter 1: Preliminary Statement

Chapter 2: General Principles of civil law

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Civil Rights

Part 2
Law of Persons

Chapter 1: Provisions Concerning Natural Person

Chapter 2: Provisions Concerning Legal Person

Chapter 3: Provisions concerning bankruptcy of a natural
person

Part 3
Family Law

Chapter 1: Provisions concerning Marriage

Chapter 2: Provisions concerning consequences of a
marriage

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Divorce

Chapter 4: Provisions concerning relation between the
parent and children

Chapter 5: Provision concerning Parental Authority

Chapter 6: Provision concerning Guardianship

Chapter 7: Provision concerning Curatorship

Chapter 8: Provision concerning adoption

Chapter 9: Provisions concerning inter-country adoption

Chapter 10: Provisions concerning partition of common
property

Chapter 11: Provisions concerning Succession

Part 4
Law of Property

Chapter 1: General Provisions Concerning Property
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Ownership
Possession

Chapter 3: Provisions Concerning Uses of Property

Chapter 4: Provisions Concerning Government, Public and
Community Properties

Chapter 5: Provisions Concerning Trust

Chapter 6: Provisions Concerning Usufruct

Chapter 7: Provisions Concerning Servitudes

Chapter 8: Provisions Concerning Cultivation and Use of

Chapter 9: Provisions Concerning House Rent

Chapter 10: Provisions Concerning Donation and Gift
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Transfer
Acquisition of Property

Chapter 12: Provisions Concerning Mortgage of Immovable
Property
Chapter
Provisions
Concerning
Pre-emption
Immovable Property

Chapter14: Provisions Concerning Registration of Deed

Chapter15: Provisions Concerning Transaction

Part 5
Law Concerning Contract and Obligation

Chapter 1: General Provisions Concerning Obligation

Chapter 2: Provisions Concerning Formation of a Contract

Chapter 3: Validity of Contract

Chapter 4: Provisions Concerning Performance of Contract

Chapter 5: Provisions Concerning Breach of Contract and
Remedies

Chapter 6: Provisions Concerning Sale of Goods Contract

Chapter 7: Provisions Concerning Guarantee

Chapter 8: Provisions Concerning Bailment Contracts

Chapter 9: Provisions Concerning Collateral or Deposit
Contracts

Chapter 10: Provisions Concerning Agency Contract
Chapter
Provisions
Contracts
Concerning
Transportation of Goods

Chapter 12: Provisions Concerning Lease Contract

Chapter 13: Provisions Concerning Hire Purchase Contract

Chapter 14: Provisions Concerning Payment of Wages

Chapter15: Provisions Concerning Indirect or Quasi Contract

Chapter 16: Provisions Concerning Unjust Enrichment

Chapter 17: Provisions Concerning Torts

Chapter 18: Provisions Concerning Liability for Defective
Products

Part -6
Provisions Concerning Private International Law
Annex-1
THE CIVIL

Part -1
PRELIMINARY
A BILL MADE TO AMEND AND CONSOLIDATE CIVIL LAWS
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to bring timely changes in
the civil law provisions in the Muluki Ain (the Country Code)
and other laws having amended and consolidated them in order
to maintain morality, decency, good conduct, convenience and
economic interest of general public by maintaining law and
order in the country and to maintain a cordial relationship
among different races, tribes or communities by providing for
just provisions in economic, social and cultural fields,
Now, therefore, the Constituent Assembly has enacted this Act
pursuant to clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution
of Nepal, 2007.

Chapter-1
Preliminary Statement
Short title and commencement: This Act may be cited as "the
Civil Code, 2010".

Chapter-11 of this Code shall come into force on
April 14, 2023 and the rest Chapters shall come into force from
the next day following the completion of one year on which it
was authenticated.
Definition: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires,
in this Code,-
"Court" means the Supreme Court, Appellate
Court and District Court and also includes any
other court, other judicial authority or official
empowered according to law to initiate
proceedings and to adjudicate any particular
type of civil cases.
"Law" means a law in force for the time being.
"Person" means a natural person and also
includes a legal person,
"Complaint" means a statement of claims and
the word also includes a complain, claim or
counter claim of any other type.
"Local body" means the Village Development
Committee or Municipality, as the case may be.
"Property" means movable or immovable
property.
Not to prejudice special legal provisions: Where a law in
force provides for a separate provision in the matters regulated
by this Code, no provision of this Code shall be deemed to have
affected such matters.

Chapter-2
General Principles of civil law
General applicability of principles and provisions: The
principles and provisions referred to in this Chapter shall generally
be applicable to the matters of civil laws.
5. Ignorance of law not to be excused: The ignorance of law shall
not be excused. Every one shall be presumed to have the
knowledge of law.
6. Act against public interest not to be carried out: No one shall
carry out any act in such a manner that it may be against public
interest.
7. Act contrary to law to be invalid: An act contrary to law shall be
invalid.
8. A wrongdoer to bear damages: (1) Whosoever causes loss or
damage to another person by committing a wrong while doing or
causing to be done an act shall have to provide compensation
therefor.
(2) Every person shall himself /herself have to bear the
consequences of the wrong act committed by him/her.
Act causing nuisance to other not to be committed: No one shall
commit or cause to be committed any act that causes nuisance,
annoyance or damage to prestige, reputation or property of other
person.
10. Not to enjoy benefit of wrong: No one shall be entitled to enjoy
benefit accrued from his/her own wrong.
11. Act against interest to be invalid: Any act carried out against
interest of a person who is under one's own guardianship,
curatorship, subjection or influence or where he/she is likely to
have influence shall be invalid.
12. Personality to be recognized: Every person shall have to recognize
other person's personality.
13. Good neighborhood to be maintained: Every person shall have to
so maintain good neighborhood as not to cause damage, loss to the
community or neighbors of his/her residence.
14. Not to be relieved from civil liability: A person shall not be
relieved from a civil liability under the law merely on the ground
that proceedings of criminal offense is initiated or not initiated
against him/her.
15. Customs or tradition contrary to law not to be recognized: No
custom or tradition contrary to law shall be recognized in
dispensation of justice.
16. Applicable to foreigners as well: Except in cases where the
subject, context or nature requires application only to a Nepali
citizen, this Code or provision concerning civil law shall equally be
applicable to a foreigner as well.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Civil Rights
To be equal in eye of law: (1) Every citizen shall be equal in
the eye of law.
No citizen shall be excluded from the equal
protection of law.
Discrimination not to be made: (1) No citizen shall be
discriminated in the application of general law on grounds of
religion, color, caste, tribe, sex, origin, language or ideological
conviction.
No citizen shall be discriminated on grounds of
race, community or profession nor shall be prevented on
grounds of caste or race from using service, amenities or
utilities of public use or entering into a public place or public
religious place or performing religious act in such places.
There shall be no discrimination with regard to
remuneration and social security between men and women for
the same work.
In a governmental or public office, a person shall be
appointed only on the basis of the qualifications determined by
the law. In so appointing, no person shall be discriminated on
grounds of religion, color, caste, race, sex, origin, language, or
ideological conviction.
Special Measures not to be taken as Discrimination not to be
deemed, where specific provision is made: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 17 and 18, where special
measures have been made by law for protection, empowerment
or development of women, dalit, indigenous ethnic people,
Madhesi, peasant, worker or economically, socially and
culturally disadvantaged class, the old, the disabled or
physically, or mentally handicapped person, such measures shall
not be deemed to be a discrimination.
Guarantee of freedoms and rights: (1) No personal liberty of
any person shall be deprived except in accordance with law.
(2) Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the following
freedoms and rights:-
To put one’s opinion and expression,
To assemble peacefully without arms,
To form union and association,
To move and reside in any part of Nepal,
To practice any profession, employment, industry,
business and to carryout the transaction of property,
To obtain education of one's own choice or in one's
own mother tongue,
To earn, use, transfer property and to carry out any
other transaction of property,
To profess and practice one's own religion practiced
from time immemorial, subject to the compliance of
public morality and traditions,
To preserve and promote the language, script or
culture of one's own community,
To operate religious place and religious trust, by
maintaining independent existence of one's own
religious community.
To protect or maintain privacy of one's own body,
residence, property, document, correspondences or
information.
21. Right to Privacy deemed to be violated: (1) Whoever commits,
save pursuant to law, any of the following acts without
obtaining consent of the concerned person, shall be deemed to
have violated right to privacy:-
entry into any person’s residence,
opening a person's correspondences or using it,
taping or recording or listening the discourse, speech,
sound through the medium of telephone or other
technology,
watching, publishing or disseminating activities,
behaviors of personal life of a person,
taking figure or photograph of a person,
making public of other's name, figure, photograph,
sound by imitation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (d)
and (e) of sub-Section (1), where a person carries out the acts
referred to in those clauses for literary or artistic purpose or
public interest, the right to privacy shall not be deemed to have
been violated.
Right to make contract: Every citizen shall have the right to
make a contract subject to the law.
No taxation save in accordance with law: No tax shall be
levied and collected from a persons' property or income save in
accordance with law.
Not to employ in work against will: No person shall be
employed into a work against his/her will.
Property not to be obtained or acquired: (1) No property of
anyone shall be acquired or recovered except in accordance with
law for the purpose of public good.
(2) No property of anyone shall be auctioned or forfeited except
in accordance with law.
Complaint may be filed: (1) A petition may be filed at the
Supreme Court, Appellate Court or District Court for the writ of
habeas corpus by the person who is arrested or detained or
anyone else on his/her behalf.
(2) In case any person has filed a petition at more than one court,
the petition filed at the higher court shall be maintained.
(3) If a person commits or there is sufficient suspicion that
he/she is going to commit an act in contravention of this Chapter,
the person going to be aggrieved from such act may, for
enforcement of his/her right, file a petition at the Appellate
Court or District Court having territorial jurisdiction.
(4) In case it is found from inquiry into the petition filed
pursuant to sub-Section (1) that the person has been arrested or
detained against law, the concerned court shall order to release
him/her immediately.
(5) In case it is found from inquiry in respect of the petition
filed pursuant to sub-Section (3) that the respondent has caused
some damage or is about to cause damage in the right of the
petitioner, the concerned court may issue an injunctive or
directive order to such a respondent not to commit or cause to be
committed any act damaging the petitioner’s right and, where
some acts have already been committed, not to commit or cause
to be committed the remaining act or to cause him/her to commit
on act.
Compensation to be awarded: If, from an examination of the
complaint filed pursuant to Section 26, the respondent is found
to have committed any act causing damage to the complainant,
the concerned court shall, having regard to the circumstances,
order the respondent to pay reasonable compensation to the
complainant.
Where an official or employee working in a governmental
or public body is held to have knowingly violated the civil rights
referred to in this Chapter, such an official or an employee shall
personally bear the compensation referred to in sub-Section (1).
Compensation for filing false complaint: (1) Where a person
is held to have filed a complaint with the intention of knowingly
causing pain or loss or damage to a person, the concerned court
shall order the person so filing the false complaint to pay a
reasonable compensation to the respondent.
The compensation to be paid under sub-Section (1) shall
include the cost incurred by the respondent for defense before
the court, court fees and legal practitioner's cost as well.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint whenever he/she desires in case of
his/her arrest or detention, and in other cases within a period of
six months from the date of carrying out of such an act.

Part - 2
CONCERNING
PERSONS

Chapter -1
Provision Concerning Natural Person
To be recognized as a person: Every person shall, immediately
after the birth, be recognized as a person and shall be entitled to
exercise right under law until he/she survives.
Right to Name: (1) Every person shall, immediately after birth,
have right to name and shall be entitled to use the given name
respectfully.
Every person shall have the right to defend his/her
name, reputation and prestige and such right shall not be
transferable to others.
No person shall be allowed to abuse other’s name.
To be considered fully competent: (1) Every person who
attains the age of eighteen years shall be considered to become
an adult and shall, in the same capacity, be considered to be a
legally fully competent.
(2) A person competent pursuant to sub-Section (1) may,
subject to law, exercise every right, bear every obligation and
discharge every duty.
To be Considered Incompetent: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 32, a person who has not attained the age
of ten years, or even if attained that age, the person who cannot
protect his/her rights and interest for the reason of unsoundness
of mind shall be considered to be legally incompetent.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Code "unsoundness of
mind" means the condition of being incapable, due to physical
and mental ill health, of knowing the act done by oneself in
general understanding and consequences thereof.
An incompetent person does not have to bear any type of
legal obligation and while exercising a right, it has to be
exercised or cause to be exercised only with the consent of
guardian or curator or through the guardian or the curator, as the
case may be.
In case of executing a deed on behalf of an incompetent
person, it has to be executed or caused to be executed through,
his/her guardian or curator, as the case may be.
To be considered quasi-competent: (1) A person who has
attained the age of ten years but not completed the age of
eighteen years shall be considered as a quasi-competent person.
A quasi-competent person may, subject to law, exercise
every right, bear every obligation and discharge every duty.
(3) A quasi-competent person shall, while exercising a right, it
has to be exercised or cause to be exercised through the guardian
or the curator, as the case may be.
In executing a deed by a quasicompetent person, it shall
be executed in the presence of his/her guardian or curator as the
case may be.
To be according to court decision: If a dispute arises about a
person's full competency, incompetency or quasi competency, it
shall be according to decision of the court.
Physical examination or organ transplantation may caused
to be carried out: (1) Any person may, subject to law, get
his/her body examined, treated or transplanted or collected any
organ or part or a sample of his/her body.
In case a person is incapable in such a way that
he/she could not express his/her consent, his/her guardian or
curator may, for the interest of such a person, carryout or cause
to be carried out the act referred to in sub-Section (1).
Cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act may be specified:
Any person may, while he/she is alive, specify the method of
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act to be followed after
his/her death.
Where a person has specified the method of
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act pursuant to sub Section (1), his/her successor shall have to conduct his/her
cremation, obsequies rites or funereal acts accordingly.
Where a person has not specified the method of
his/her cremation, obsequies rites or funereal act, his/her
successor shall have to conduct such person's cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal act according to prevailing customs
and tradition.
Corpse or organ may be donated: (1) Any person may express
in writing his/her will to donate after his/her death his/her
corpse or any organ of body or any part thereof to a person to
use or cause to be used for a particular work.
Where a person expresses his/her will pursuant to
sub-Section (1), his/her, successor shall have to use deceased’s
corpse, part of the body or a portion thereof according to the
will of the deceased.
Where a will is not expressed pursuant to sub Section or, even where expressed, if such will fails to be
executed or becomes impossible to be executed, his/her
successor shall have to conduct the deceased's cremation,
obsequies rites or funereal act according to prevailing tradition
and culture.
To be considered a place of residence : (1) Where a person's
place of residence needs to be determined, the place given by
him/her for that purpose, where he/she has so given and if not
so given, his/her place of permanent residence within Nepal
shall be considered to be his/her place of residence.
Where a person does not have residence or his/her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-Section (1), the place
of his/her abode for the time being shall be considered to be
his/her place residence.
Where a person does not have a residence or his/her
residence is not traced out pursuant to sub-Section (1) or (2), the
place of carrying out of trade, business, employment or
transaction, if he/she is so carrying out, shall be considered
his/her place of residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), (2) or (3), where the place of a person's residence is changed,
the place where he/she is living for the time being shall be
considered to be his/her place of residence.
Where the residence of a quasi-competent person
needs to be determined, the place where the guardian or curator,
as the case may be, of such a person resides shall be considered
as his/her place of residence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, if a person considers a place, as the place of his/her
residence for a particular purpose, such a place shall be
considered to be his /her place of residence.
Presumed to be dead: (1) If a person disappears without any
notice for a consecutive period of twelve years or if a person to
whom it is natural to have information about such a disappeared
person has not received any information about him/her since last
twelve years, such a person shall, except in case an evidence
establishing that he/she is alive is received, be deemed to be
dead.
Provided that in any of the following circumstances, such a
person shall be deemed to have died after completion of the
following period:-
In the case of a person having completed
eighty years, five years;
In the case of a soldier deputed to war field,
four years from the cessation of the war;
In the case of a person traveling in an aero
plane, ship or other vehicle that met with an
accident, three years from the date of such an
accident.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3) of
proviso to sub-Section (1), where a person dies in an accident
and there is no evidence of another person meeting with the
same accident to remain alive, such a person also shall be
deemed to have died simultaneously.
(3) Where more than one person are dead at one and the
same time in an accident, each person so died is deemed, except
in the case proved otherwise, to have been died simultaneously.
Provided that where for a particular purpose a question
that which of the persons died first in such an accident requires
to be determined, the person who was older by age at the time of
death shall, unless otherwise proved, be deemed to have died
first.
In case the concerned person files a petition stating
that any person has disappeared without a notice or died due to a
natural calamity or accident and requests for a judicial
declaration on such person's death, disclosing therewith the date,
place and bases of the death, the court may, after examining
evidence, issue an order of judicial declaration on the death of
such a person.
If a person declared dead pursuant to sub-Section (4)
is alive and himself/herself files a petition to get the judicial
declaration passed earlier to be annulled or if his/her successor
files a petition for annulment of the previous judicial declaration
on death for the reason that the date of the death of such
deceased happened to be different than the date referred to in the
judicial declaration; the court shall, having examined into this
matter, annual or amend the judicial declaration made pursuant
to sub-Section (4).
Provided that,-
Where a wife alive has concluded another
marriage
after
declaration,
matrimonial relationship with the person
declared dead can not be re-established.
There shall be no adverse affect on the legal
rights of the person declared to be dead.
The act that has already been carried out
pursuant to the previous judicial declaration
shall not be prejudiced by virtue of the
establishment of a new date of death.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint as follows:-
In case of the situation referred to in Section 36,
within three months from the date of the action taken;
In case of the situation referred to in sub-Section (5)
of Section 40, within six months from the date of
having information thereof,
In situations other than those referred to in clauses
(a) and (b), within six months from the date of
carrying out of such action.

Chapter -2
Provision Concerning Legal Person
Legal person to acquire capacity: (1) A body corporate
incorporated pursuant to law shall obtain legal personality and
obtain legal competency in the same capacity.
In order to acquire legal competency pursuant to
sub-Section (1), such a body corporate shall have to be
registered.
Except where separate provisions have been made in
law for registration pursuant to sub-Section (2), an application
shall be submitted to the competent authority having specified
the following matters:-
Name of the body corporate,
Head Office of the body corporate,
Objectives and functions of the body corporate,
The capital structure, if any, of the body corporate
and details thereof,
Other necessary details.
After registration of a body corporate pursuant to
sub-Section (2), such a body corporate shall be deemed to
have been incorporated.
A legal person shall have a corporate personality and
shall use a separate seal for its own proceedings.
A body corporate incorporated pursuant to this
Section shall be an autonomous and body corporate with
perpetual succession and may, in the same capacity, carry out as
a person the following functions:-
to acquire, hold, earn, possess, dispose off, sell
or manage otherwise property,
to execute a contract, exercise rights and
discharge obligations under the contract or to
assume otherwise right or obligation of any
type,
to frame bye-laws required to operate its own
functions, proceedings or business,
to appoint necessary employees to carry out its
functions,
to open branches or other office subject to
its statute and law,
to open an account in a bank or financial
institution and to operate the account,
to do other functions according to law.
A legal person may initiate a complaint or other
legal proceedings in its own name and a complaint or other legal
proceedings may be initiated also against such a person.
To obtain legal capacity after registration: (1) A legal person
shall obtain legal capacity in respect of civil and commercial act
and activities after its incorporation
The legal capacity obtained pursuant to sub-Section
(1) shall stand existed until the legal person is liquidated,
dissolved or wounded up under the law.
Legal capacity deemed to be acquired automatically:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 42, the following
body, as a legal person, shall be deemed to have ipso facto
obtained capacity:-
The State of Nepal,
Government of Nepal,
Ministries,
secretariats,
departments
Government
Nepal
other
government offices,
Courts, constitutional bodies or any body
thereunder,
Village
Development
Committees,
Municipalities
District
Development
Committees,
Commission, committee and other similar
other bodies set up by Government of Nepal,
Organization or bodies set up under law,
such organizations established for public
purpose as shrine, temple, deity place, Chaitya,
monasteries, mosque, church, public rest house
(dharmashala), Public inn, graveyard which
has been operated from time immemorial and
possesses movable and immovable property,
Community schools or colleges established for
public purpose.
Place of location of legal person: The place of location of a
legal person shall be as specified at the time of incorporation of
body corporate and where such place is not so specified the
place where its headquarters or registered office is located and
where such office or place also is not specified, the place where
the main administrative office or transaction and business of
such a body corporate is located shall be considered to be the
place of the location.
Management and operation of a legal person: (1) A legal
person shall be managed and operated in accordance with the
provisions of such a person and where such provision is not
made, it shall be managed and operated by one or more directors.
The legal person shall be responsible for the
management and operation made by a director or directors
pursuant to sub-Section (1).
Where there are more than one director, the decision
taken by majority directors shall, except otherwise provided, be
deemed to be decision of the legal person.
Operation of business of a legal person: (1) In operating
business on behalf of a legal person, the business shall, except
otherwise provided, be operated by directors of such persons.
In operating business pursuant to sub-Section (1),
director or directors may so delegate power to any director or
directors or other person as to operating any business.
Right or liability to devolve upon merger of a legal person:
(1) If a legal person is, for any reason, merged with another
legal person, the right and liability of such a person shall be as
specified at the time of such merger.
Where a specification is not made pursuant to sub Section (1), the right and liability of the legal person to be
merged shall be devolved to the legal person with which such a
person is merged.
Legal person may act as agent: A legal person may act as an
agent of any other person.
Not to participate in decision-making in case of conflict of
interest: (1) A director shall not take part in a decision making
process on a matter involving his/her personal interest.
Where a decision is affected by conflict of interest
under sub-Section (1), such a decision shall be void.
Legal person to be liable: If a loss or damage is caused to a
person from an act and action done by a person on behalf of a
legal person, such a legal person shall be liable therefor and bear
compensation therefor.
Provided that if any loss is caused by doing an act beyond
the objective and competency of the legal person, the director or
a person doing such an act shall personally be liable therefor.
Assets or liability to be settled: If a legal person is dissolved
for any reason, the assets and liability of such a person shall be
required to be settled according to laws.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out according
to this Chapter may file a complaint within the period of thirty
five days in the case of Section 50 and in other cases, within the
period of six months of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Bankruptcy of Natural Person
Bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated: (1) Where a
person’s debt and other liability to be borne by him/her exceeds
his/her assets, bankruptcy proceedings may be initiated for
payment or recovery of debt or settlement of liability from such
assets.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), no bankruptcy proceedings shall be initiated in the
following conditions:-
If a person who has regular income proves that
his/her income can pay or set off debt or other
liability within a certain period or the creditor
is satisfied in such matter,
If the person likely to be a bankrupt asks a
period of up to five years specifying the period
of time to pay the debts of creditors and
sources thereof from the date of origin of
conditions necessitating commencement of
bankruptcy proceedings in order to enjoin or
cause to be enjoined from initiating that
proceedings or,
If the creditor does not agree to initiate or
cause to be initiated bankruptcy proceedings.
Explanation:
(1) For the purpose of this Chapter, the term
"assets" means the concerned person's property
standing for the time being or to be earned or
likely to be earned up to the time prior to
completion
bankruptcy
proceedings
pursuant to this Chapter.
For the purpose of clause (c), the term
"creditor" means, where there are more than
one creditor, creditors or a group of creditors
who hold fifty percent or more debt over the
total debt of the person likely to become
bankrupt.
If a debt or a claim of a creditor is settled from
assets of a person under this Chapter, such a
person shall be deemed to become a bankrupt.
The court shall have to send the record of the
persons being bankrupt pursuant to sub-section
(3) to the Bankruptcy Administration Office to
be established according to law.
The Bankruptcy Administration Office shall
have to maintain the updated record referred to
in sub-section (4).
Upon declared to be bankrupt pursuant to subsection (3), he/she shall not be required to pay
debt or fulfill the obligation other than the
debt or obligation he/she has to pay or fulfill
and settled under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (6), the following obligation shall have
to be fulfilled from the trade, business or
transaction
he/she
starts
his/her
declaration of being bankrupt:-
Taxes, fees or charges to be paid to
Government of Nepal;
Amount of punishment or fine to be paid
according to order of a court;
Amount to be paid for embezzlement of
property of the person under his/her
guardianship or curatorship;
Amount to be said for the goods stolen;
Amount to be paid for embezzlement of
property of trust.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this section, in case any person is bankrupt
he/she may carry out any trade, business or
transaction other than an act or activity he/she
is prohibited to do in that capacity according
to law.
Petition to be filed to initiate bankruptcy proceedings: (1) In
order to initiate bankruptcy proceedings pursuant to sub-Section
(1) of Section 54, the person who is likely to be a bankrupt
himself/herself or a creditor or group of creditors having claim
at least of twenty five percent or more over the debt of the total
debt if the amount of the debt is disclosed and if the amount of
the debt is not disclosed having a claim more than one hundred
thousand rupees borrowed by such a person may file a petition
before the court.
(2) Where a person likely to be a bankrupt himself /
herself files a petition pursuant to sub-Section (1), the following
details shall have to specify in the petition:-
exact statement of his/her total assets and
value thereof,
statement of the total debt amount borrowed
by him/her, interest accrued thereon and
details of the creditor or creditors providing
such debt along with their address,
if he/she has to discharge other liability,
details thereof,
reason for failing to pay debt or discharge
other liability.
Where a creditor or group of creditors files a
petition pursuant to sub-Section (1), the petitioner shall have to
specify in the petition the evidence of his/her borrower likely to
be a bankrupt, details of his/her assets to the extent of
petitioner's
knowledge
approximate
value
thereof,
petitioner's claim, if the petitioner has the knowledge of other
creditor's debt or claim such debt and claim and also addresses
of such creditors.
Before filing a petition pursuant to sub-Section (1)
to initiate bankruptcy proceedings, a creditor or group of
creditor shall have to give a notice to the borrower with a time
limit at least of three months to pay his/her debt or discharge
other liability and matter of filing a petition before the court to
initiate bankruptcy proceedings if the borrower fails to pay debt
within that period.
Notice to be given to the creditor: (1) Where a borrower files a
petition pursuant to Section 2 to initiate bankruptcy proceedings,
the concerned court shall issue a notice of thirty five days and
serve the same in the name of the creditor or group of creditors
whose debt the borrower has specified as payable and publish a
notice relating thereto in any daily newspaper of national level.
The notice to be published under sub-Section (1) and
(2) shall contain a statement inviting any other person having
claim, if any, of any type over the assets of the person whose
assets is under bankruptcy proceeding to make a claim with
evidence within the time limit as specified in the same sub Section
The claim made within the time-limit under sub Section (1) or (2) by the creditor or group of creditors or others
shall be considered to be the final claim made against the assets
of the borrower and the bankruptcy proceedings of his/her assets
shall be commenced on the same basis.
Notice to be given to borrower: (1) Where a creditor or group
of creditor has filed a petition to initiate the bankruptcy
proceedings of the assets of the borrower pursuant to Section 55,
the concerned court shall have to issue a notice along with a
time limit of thirty five days to the borrower to reply whether or
not the bankruptcy proceedings requires to be carried out, and if
there exists any grounds for not carrying out bankruptcy
proceedings, to appear before the court with evidence thereof.
Where a notice is given to the borrower pursuant to
sub-Section (1), a notice shall be given to other creditor or the
claimant to make claim in that respect within thirty five days
and such a notice shall be published in any daily newspapers of
national level.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(2), in case the court deems that the property under bankruptcy
proceedings may be embezzled or such property may not
appropriately be managed if it is allowed to be managed by
himself/herself or by a member of his/her family, the court may,
on application of a party or on its own discretion, handover the
responsibility of management of such property to any of the
following persons:-
a) The person licensed as bankruptcy professional
according to law;
b) The Bankruptcy trustee appointed according to law;
c) Any employee of officer level of the court or legal
practitioner appointed by the court.
The claim of a person who fails to submit a claim
within the period under sub-Section (2) shall not be valid after
that period.
The fee to be charged for publishing a notice in a
national-level daily paper pursuant to sub-section (2) or subsection (1) of Section 56 shall be recovered from the concerned
applicant.
The fee recovered pursuant to sub-section (5) may
be got to be paid from the debtor in the course of bankruptcy.
Order to be given to initiate bankruptcy proceedings : (1)
Where a petition is filed before the court pursuant to Section 55
to initiate bankruptcy proceedings, the court shall have to give
an order as to whether it would be appropriate to initiate
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of that petition or not.
Where an order is given to initiate bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-Section (1), the court shall, at the
request of the person likely to be a bankrupt himself or herself
or the creditor, order any other member of the family of such
person to keep as it is basis for the purpose of bankruptcy, the
assets of the person in respect of whose assets the bankruptcy
proceedings is to be commenced.
If, in issuing an order pursuant sub-Section (2), the
court is of the opinion, from the petition of the creditor or
otherwise, that such a person may misappropriate the assets or
that the assets shall not be distributed in an equitable manner,
the court may, by specifying reasons therefor, designate a local
body or any person as the manager of such assets.
The local body or person designated pursuant to sub Section (3) shall have to manage the assets likely to be bankrupt
as ordered by the court.
Transaction to be ipso facto stayed or void: Where a court
issues an order pursuant to sub-Section (1) of Section 58 to
initiate the bankruptcy proceedings of a person's assets, any of
the following activities can not be carried out without the order
of the court after issuance of such an order and where such
activities are already commenced or are being carried out but
not completed, such activities shall, ipso facto, be stayed:
to transfer in any manner to any person the title to,
bail, pledge, mortgage or to lease or rent in any way
for a period of more than one year, the assets of a
person who is likely to be a bankrupt,
to attach or, execute the pledge, mortgage of, the
assets of the person likely to be a bankrupt
according to the judgment of a court,
to pay debt or discharge liability of any person from
the assets of the person likely to be a bankrupt.
deed,
contract,
practice,
transaction
arrangements executed in contravention of the provision referred
to in sub-Section (1) shall, ipso facto, be deemed to be void.
Opportunity to be provided to reconcile the sum of debt:
Where the court orders to start bankruptcy proceedings pursuant
to sub-Section (1) of Section 58, the local body or a person who
is awarded responsibility to manage property pursuant to sub Section (3) of the same Section shall, after the assets, debt and
other liability of the borrower are ascertained, call a meeting of
the debtors, creditors, or other claimants.
In the meeting called pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the creditor shall be given, by mutual consent of the person
likely to be a bankrupt and the creditor or other claimants, a
reasonable opportunity to waive his/her claim wholly or
partially from the whole or any assets of the borrower or to
reconcile sum by taking the money less than his/her claim.
In reconciling the sum pursuant to sub-Section (2),
an arrangement may be made whereby a creditor pays the debt
or claim of some or majority creditors and such a creditor
submits a lump sum claim against such person.
Where the parties secure consent pursuant to sub Section (2) or (3) or where the concerned parties agree, for any
reasons, to stay the bankruptcy proceedings for the time being, a
joint petition may be filed before the court accordingly.
If a petition is filed for staying the bankruptcy
proceedings pursuant to sub-Section (4), the court shall have to
make an order to stay as requested bankruptcy proceedings for a
period not exceeding the period set forth in clause (b) of sub Section (2) of Section 1.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-Section (5),
bankruptcy proceedings in respect of the assets of such property
can not be carried out until the expiry of that period.
Priority order of paying debt or liability: (1) In carrying out
or causing to be carried out bankruptcy proceedings of the assets
of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the debt to be paid or the
liability to be discharged by such person shall be settled, on the
basis of the following priority order, from the assets of such a
person:
incurred
carrying
bankruptcy
proceedings,
the liability of the secured creditor who has provided
debt against a pledge or mortgage, to the extent of
such pledge or mortgage,
tax, fine to be paid to Government of Nepal or other
government charges and dues,
debt of the creditors other than those referred to in
clause (b),
claim of other claimants other than those referred
to in clauses (b), (c) or (d).
In paying or setting off debt or liability pursuant to
sub-Section (1), where there are more than one creditors or
claimants of one and same priority order, the debt or claim shall
be set off in the proportionate rate from the assets bankrupted
in the ratio of the debt or claim of each creditor or claimant.
In paying the debt of the secured creditors pursuant
to clause (b) sub-Section (1), if, after recovery of his/her debt
from the assets pledged or mortgaged to him/her, there remains
any portion or sum of such pledge, other creditors or claimants
may make claim over such portion or sum.
Provided that if the secured creditor's debt is not fully
recovered from such assets, he/she can not make a claim over
other property.
Debt of a creditor who shows excess debt not to receive
priority: If the creditor and the person likely to be a bankrupt
are proved to have shown, by collusion, excess debt or claim
from a fictitious transaction with malafide intention of causing
loss to other creditors or claimants, notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-Section (1) of Section 61, the debt or liability
of such a creditor shall be paid or set off only after the debt or
liability of other creditor or claimant is satisfied.
Property to be set aside: Prior to effecting bankruptcy of the
assets of a person pursuant to this Chapter, the following
property shall be set aside and bankruptcy proceedings shall be
carried out from remaining assets:-
if there exists any property as the personal property
of a person other than one who is likely be a
bankrupt, such property,
clothes up to three pairs and shoes up to three pairs
being worn or to be worn by the person who is likely
to be a bankrupt and a member of the undivided
family of such a person,
one set of cooking and dining utensils, one set of
bedding
materials
reasonable
number
furniture, required to the undivided family member
of the person likely to be a bankrupt;
medicines and health-related equipment required to
the person likely to be bankrupt and the member of
his/her undivided family;
books required for study;
food grain required for subsistence for not exceeding
three months to the persons referred to in clause (b);
one set of tools, instruments or arms related to the
profession of the persons referred to in clause (b).
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f) or (g) of sub-Section (1), the total value of the
property referred to in those clauses shall not exceed thirty
thousand rupees.
Assets not to be concealed: (1) A person who files a petition
pursuant to Section 55 for commencing bankruptcy proceedings
of his/her assets shall have to submit an exact inventory of
his/her whole assets.
(2) In submitting an inventory under sub-section (1), if
he/she conceals or suppress such assets with malafide intention
of causing loss or damage to the creditor, a separate suit may be
instituted against him/her.
Where assets have been concealed pursuant to sub Section (1), and such assets are discovered before completion of
bankruptcy proceedings, the proceedings referred to in sub Section (2) of Section 61 shall be carried out in respect of the
creditor and claimant who discover the assets and other creditor
and claimant as well.
If the assets under sub-Section (3) are discovered
by a creditor or claimant after bankruptcy proceedings has been
completed, where such a creditor or a claimant has already
satisfied the sum according to his/her claim at the time of
bankruptcy proceedings he/she shall be given ten percent
amount of the assets so discovered and where his/her claim
amount was not satisfied, his/her sum shall be caused to be
satisfied from such assets and the remaining assets shall be
distributed pursuant to the same sub-Section to other creditors
and claimants.
Provided that if the creditor or claimant is the successor or
relative of the bankrupt person, he/she shall not be entitled to
such facility.
If the concealed assets are balanced after payment to
the creditor or claimant pursuant to sub-Section (4), such assets
shall be returned to the concerned person.
Status of bankrupted to be terminated: (1) The status of a
bankrupt person falling under bankruptcy shall remain for a
period of twelve years from the date on which he/she has
become a bankrupt.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
if a bankrupt person pays all liabilities payable to the creditors
at the time of bankruptcy, he/she may file a petition to a court to
terminate the status of a bankruptcy along with evidences
thereof.
(3) If a petition is filed under sub-section (2), the court
shall, in order to conduct a hearing thereupon, order to serve a
summon giving a period of fifteen days time limit excluding a
time required for journey, to all creditors who were either
partially paid or unpaid at the time bankruptcy of such a person
and invite them therefor.
While conducting a hearing upon the petition
submitted under sub-section (2), the court may, if it seems that
the bankrupt person has satisfied all the debts and liabilities
which were unpaid at the time of bankruptcy, order to revoke the
order issued at the time of bankruptcy of the person.
(5) If an order is issued under sub-section (4), the status of
the bankrupt person shall be deemed to be terminated after three
years from the date on which such an order is issued.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under
Chapter may file a complaint within the following periods from
the date of arising out of the cause of action for commencement
of the bankruptcy proceedings:-
a) In matters under Section 54, within three years from the
date of arising out of the cause of action;
b) In matters under Sections 62 and 64, within two years
from the date of having knowledge thereof;
c) In the matters other than those referred to in clauses (a)
and (b), within the period of six months from the date of
carrying out of such act.

PART-3
FAMILY LAW

Chapter -1
Provision concerning Marriage
Marriage deemed to be solemnized: If a man or woman
accepts each other as husband and wife through any occasion,
ceremony, formal or any act, a marriage shall be deemed to
have been solemnized.
Marriage to be an inviolable social bond: (1) Marriage shall
be a permanent, inviolable and holy social and legal bond, based
on free consent, established between man and woman to start
conjugal and family life.
The marital bond under sub-section (1) shall subsist
until extinguished pursuant to Section 82.
Freedom of a marriage: (1) Every person shall, subject to law,
have the freedom to conclude a marriage, establishing family
and spending conjugal life.
Every person's family life shall be inviolable.
Marriage may be concluded: (1) Subject to this Chapter, a
marriage may be concluded between a man and woman in the
following conditions:-
if a man and woman agrees to accept each other as
husband and wife,
if the man and woman are not relatives, punishable
by law in incest,
if matrimonial relationship of both the man and the
woman does not exist,
if the man has completed twenty two years of age
and the woman has completed twenty years of age.
Provided that a marriage may be solemnized with
the consent of guardian even if the man and woman
have attained eighteen years of age.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of subsection (1), it shall not hinder to solemnize or cause to be
solemnized a marriage within the relationship that is allowed to
marry in accordance with the prevailing practices in an ethnic
community or a clan.
Marriage not to be solemnized: (1) No person shall solemnize
or cause to be solemnized a marriage to a man or woman, as the
case may be, lacking the requisites for marriage under Section
No person shall solemnize or cause to be solemnized
a marriage between a man or woman of the following conditions
by way of misrepresentation:-
contracted
human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Hepatitis
One who has already been proved that he/she
has no sexual organs, is an impotent or having
no reproductive capability;
One who is a dumb, or has lost hearing
capacity, has both eye-blinded or is suffering
from leprosy;
One who is not having sound mind;
One who is already a married;
One who is a pregnant;
One who is convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude by a court.
Marriage to be void: A marriage solemnized in the following
conditions shall, ipso facto, be void:-
A marriage solemnized without the consent of the
man or woman,
A marriage solemnized between the relatives,
punishable by law in incest.
Provided that the marriage solemnized pursuant to
sub-section (2) of Section 70 shall not be void.
The void marriage under sub-section (1) shall be
invalid ab initio.
Voidable Marriage: (1) Any of the parties to a marriage
solemnized in the following circumstances may get such a
marriage annulled if he/she does not accept the marriage:-
If the marriageable age set forth in clause (d) of

Section 70 is not completed,
If the marriage is solemnized or caused to be
solemnized by misrepresenting pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 71.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), a marriage shall be void only with consent of the woman if
the woman is pregnant as a consequence of the marriage.
Marriage to be deemed solemnized if a child is born from
physical intercourse: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (2) of Section 69, if a woman is proved to have
produced a child by conceiving pregnancy from physical
intercourse with a man, marriage between such a man and a
woman shall, ipso facto, be deemed to have been solemnized.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), no marriage shall be deemed to have been solemnized
between a man and woman in the following circumstances even
if a child is born from physical intercourse with a man:-
If a woman gives birth to a child by conceiving
pregnancy as the consequence of rape,
Except in case of the relationship of under subsection (2) of Section 70, if a woman gives birth to a
child by conceiving pregnancy from a physical
intercourse with a man within the relationship
punishable by law for incest.
No lawful rights of a child already born to be prejudiced:
There shall be no prejudice in the lawful rights of the child born
from marriage if the marriage becomes void pursuant to Section
72 or the marriage is declared to be void pursuant to Section 73
or of the child born in the events referred to in sub-section (1) of

Section 74.
Marriage to be registered: (1) A husband and wife shall have
to get their marriage registered by filing an application to the
concerned local body.
Provided that in the circumstance referred to in subsection (1) of Section 74, either of the husband or wife may file
an application for registration of the marriage.
(2) A husband and wife residing outside Nepal may submit
an application for registration of marriage before the Nepalese
embassy or consulate general located in the country in which
they have been residing.
(3) If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2) for registration of a marriage, the concerned authority shall,
after registering the marriage in the book relating to marriage
maintained in its office, issue the Marriage Registration
Certificate to the applicant within fifteen days of submission of
the application in the format as specified by Government of
Nepal.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
"Concerned authority" means the authority to
register a marriage.
"Office" also includes the office of a local
body.
(4) If the marriage seems not liable to be registered
according to the application filed pursuant to sub-section (1) or
(2), the concerned authority shall inform the applicant
specifying the reasons therefor within a period of seven days of
the filing of the application.
(5) In case either of the parties does not appear for
registration of a marriage according to the application filed
pursuant to the proviso to sub-section (1), the concerned
authority shall register the marriage after inquiring such a party.
(6) While inquiring pursuant to sub-section (5), in case
such a party expresses disagreement, the concerned authority
shall not register the marriage and inform the applicant that the
decision on that matter shall be made as decided by court.
The concerned authority shall have to safely
maintain the records of the details of the registration of the
marriage under this Section.
The couples married before commencement of this
Code may, if they so desire, get their marriage registered
pursuant to this Section.
Provided that marriage between those couples shall not be
deemed to be legally invalid merely for the reason that such
marriage is not registered.
Marriage by registration: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in sub-section (2) of Section 69 and Section 74, if a
man and woman desires to solemnize a marriage by registration,
they shall have to file an application before the concerned
district court, if they are living within Nepal, and before the
Nepalese embassy or consulate general, if they have been living
outside Nepal, specifying therein their name, surname, age,
address, profession, the name of their father, mother, grandfather, grand-mother, whether previously married or not, if
married, the details of the dissolution of a marriage and also the
name of at least two witnesses.
In order to file an application pursuant to subsection (1), either the man or the woman or both must have
resided from at least fifteen days in the concerned district if the
application has to be filed before the district court and, if the
application is to be filed before the embassy or consulate office,
in the country in which such an embassy or consulate general’s
office is situated.
Decision to be made as to whether marriage is solemnizable:
(1) If an application is filed pursuant to Section 77 for
solemnization of a marriage by registration, the concerned
authority shall have to make, after making a necessary inquiry, a
decision within seven days of the filing of the application, as to
whether or not the marriage is solemnizable.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), if the marriage authority based in a foreign country has
suspicion about the proposed marriage, it shall have to refer the
matter to Government of Nepal and dispose off the matter
according to the decision of Government of Nepal.
Deed of Consent to be prepared: If a decision is made
pursuant to Section 78 to the effect that marriage is
solemnizable between the applicants, the concerned officer shall
prepare a deed of consent for marriage recording the matters
specified in the application and a statement to the effect that the
parties to the marriage have consented to accept each other as
husband and wife, cause the contracting parties and witnesses
present to sign on the deed in his/her presence and also
himself/herself sign the deed.
Provision concerning registration of a marriage: (1) After the
deed of consent has been prepared pursuant to Section 79, the
concerned officer shall register such a marriage in the
registration book and himself/herself sign and cause the parties
to the marriage and witnesses present as well to sign in the book.
Once the marriage is registered pursuant to subsection (1), the concerned officer shall issue a Marriage
Registration
Certificate
format
specified
Government of Nepal, to the parties to the marriage registration.
Marriage shall be deemed to have been solemnized
between the petitioners from the date on which the Marriage
Registration Certificate is obtained pursuant to sub-section (2).
Provision concerning use of surname by a married woman:
(1) A married woman may, after marriage, use the surname used
by her father or mother or family name of her husband or both
the surnames.
(2) If a question arises as to the surname of a married
woman, except otherwise proved, she shall be deemed to have
used the surname of her husband.
(3) If the marriage of a woman who has used the surname
of her husband is dissolved, she may, if she so desires, use the
surname used by her father or mother.
Matrimonial relationship deemed to be terminated: In any of
the following circumstances, the marital relation between the
husband and the wife shall be deemed to have been terminated:
if a marriage is annulled pursuant to Section 72 or
if a marriage is dissolved according to law between
husband and wife, or
if the wife concludes another marriage before
effecting divorce pursuant to law.
Re-marriage may be concluded: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a man or woman may remarry in the following conditions:-
if the matrimonial relationship between a husband
and a wife is terminated pursuant to Section 82,
if a husband or wife dies,
if it is proved that husband or wife has contracted
an incurable venereal disease,
if a husband and a wife are legally separated with
taking partition.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within three months from the date
on which such an act is carried out.

Chapter-2
Provision concerning consequences of a marriage
To be considered husband and wife: After solemnization of a
marriage between a man and a woman, they shall be considered,
so long as such matrimonial relationship subsists, each other's
husband and wife.
Relation and obligation of husband and wife: (1) The husband
and wife must have mutual love and good faith.
The husband and wife must establish and spend
conjugal life by living together.
The husband and wife must help, protect and respect
each other.
Husband's home to be considered a residence: Except where a
separate residence is fixed by mutual understanding of the
husband and wife, the husband's home shall be considered to be
a residence of a wife.
To be considered each other's agent: The husband and the
wife shall, except otherwise provided for in the law or except in
cases where there is a legal dispute between husband and wife,
be considered as each other's agent in the general household
affairs.
To provide or cause to be provided maintenance cost in
accordance with reputation: The husband and the wife shall
provide or cause to be provided each other maintenance cost and
health care according to their reputation and ability.
Household affairs to be managed by consent: (1) The husband
and wife of an undivided family shall have to manage the
household affairs by mutual consent according to their property,
income and capacity.
Except otherwise provided for in the law, the
husband and the wife shall seek each other's consent in selling
or otherwise transferring the movable and immovable property
registered in their own name.
Not to preclude from exercising profession, business or
occupation: The husband and the wife shall not preclude each
other from exercising a profession, business, or occupation of
his/her skill, qualifications, capability.
Limitation: A person aggrieved by act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within three months from the date
on which such an act is carried out.

Chapter-3
Provision Concerning Divorce
Divorce may be effected by consent of both: If both the
husband and the wife desire, they may cause the relationship of
husband and wife divorced at any time.
Husband may effect divorce: The husband may effect divorce
in any of the following circumstances even without consent of
the wife:-
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately under the law, if the wife has been living
separately for three years or more consecutively
without consent of the husband;
If the wife deprives the husband of maintenance
costs or expels him from home;
If the wife commits an act or fraud likely to cause
the death of or grievous hurt or any other greater
physical or mental pain to the husband;
If the wife is proved to have committed adultery.
Wife may affect divorce: The wife may effect divorce in any of
the following circumstances even without consent of the
husband:-
Except where the husband and wife are living
separately under the law, if the husband is living
separately for three years or more consecutively;
If the husband deprives the wife of maintenance
costs or expels her from home;
If the husband commits an act or fraud likely to
cause the death of or grievous hurt or any other
greater physical or mental pain to the wife;
If the husband concludes another marriage;
If the husband is proved to have had sexual
intercourse with another woman;
If the husband is proved to have committed a rape of
the wife.
Petition to be filed for a divorce: The husband or wife, as the
case may be, desiring to get the relationship divorced shall have
to file a petition to a court.
Reconciliation to be made between the husband and wife: If a
petition is filed for a divorce pursuant to Section 96, the court
first shall, to the extent possible, reconcile both the parties
through persuasion.
Divorce to be caused: If the court fails to bring reconciliation
even after persuasion pursuant to Section 97 and the court deems
appropriate to get the relationship divorced than to continue it
any longer, the court shall cause the relationship between them
divorced.
Partition of property to be effected before divorce: (1) In
cases where a divorce is to be affected with the consent of the
husband and the wife or because of the husband, the court shall,
if the wife so demands, cause the partition to be effected
between the husband and the wife before effecting the divorce.
In cases where the husband himself has not obtained
partition from his father or other coparceners. The court shall,
by causing both the parties to provide the list of coparceners,
and if there are other coparceners who are entitled to partition,
by inquiring such coparceners as well, cause partition to be
apportioned between the husband and the wife.
If it appears that partition under sub-section (1) and
(2) will take long time, the court may, by causing the divorce to
be effected between the husband and the wife, order the husband
to provide the wife monthly expense according to the property
and income of the husband until the partition is affected.
Provided that if such a woman concludes another marriage
before affecting partition, she shall not be entitled to a partition
share.
100. Lump sum amount or alimony may caused to be provided:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 99, if the wife
who effects divorce desires to obtain from the husband a lump
sum amount or annual or monthly alimony instead of a partition
share, the court may order the husband to provide such a wife a
lump sum amount or annual or monthly alimony on the basis of
his property or income.
Provided that if such a wife concludes another marriage,
such an amount shall have not to be provided.
101. Maintenance cost may be caused to be provided: If a wife
who has not obtained partition from the husband for there being
no property for partition under Section 99, desires to receive
maintenance cost from the husband and where the husband has
income, the court may cause the husband to pay maintenance
cost to the wife according to his income.
Provided that:
(1) If such a wife concludes another marriage, such cost
shall have not to be paid,
If the income of the wife is higher than that of the
husband, such cost shall have not to be caused to be
awarded.
102. To be according to agreement: Notwithstanding anything
contained in other Sections of this Chapter, where a written
agreement is concluded at the time of effecting divorce between
the husband and wife on partition share or the cost the wife is
entitled to on divorce, it shall be according to such agreement.
Provided that no agreement may be concluded which shall
be contrary to the interest of a minor.
103. Previous child or husband to obtain property: (1) On death of
a divorcee woman, her son and daughter, if any, shall be entitled
to her property, and if not, the husband shall obtain the property
received by her from such a husband and the successor on her
mother's side shall obtain other property.
If a divorcee woman concludes another marriage, the
property obtained by her from the husband shall upon divorce be
obtained by the son, daughter from such husband; if any, and if
not; by the husband prior to divorce.
104. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-4
Provision concerning relation between the parent and children
105. Maternity or paternity to be determined from mother or
father: (1) In case a person's maternity or paternity requires to
be determined, it shall be determined on the basis of his / her
mother or father, as the case may be.
In determining paternity pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person who was the husband of the mother at the time of the
birth of such a person shall be presumed, unless otherwise
proved, to be a father of such a person.
106. Child presumed to be born from husband: Unless otherwise
proved, a child born in the following circumstances shall be
presumed to be born from the married husband:-
Born after one hundred eighty days from the date on
which a marriage was solemnized,
Born within two hundred seventy days from the date
on which a divorce was effected.
107. Paternity may be denied: (1) Except otherwise agreed upon
between the husband and wife, the paternity of a child born to
the wife before one hundred eighty days of the solemnization of
the marriage may be denied by the husband and where the
husband is already dead before the birth of the child by the
successor to the husband.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where a man solemnizes a marriage with a woman with
knowledge or having reasonable ground to know that she was
pregnant before the marriage, the paternity of such a child
cannot be denied merely on ground of birth before that period.
108. Son, daughter or paternity to be claimed: (1) If a child whose
paternity or maternity is not determined has to be claimed as
one's own son or daughter, such a claim shall have to be made
within a period of two years of the child being born or of being
identified, if unidentified.
(2) In claiming the paternity of a child born without the
paternity being identified, a claim shall be made within a period
of two years of the birth of such a child.
Provided that no claim shall be entertained if such a child is
already dead.
109. Paternity of a child born from artificial insemination to be of
father: A child born from the use, with consent of the husband
and wife, of artificial insemination system from semen of any
other person shall be considered to have been born from the
married husband and his/her paternity shall be determined
accordingly.
110. To be according to court's decision: If a dispute arises as to
the maternity or paternity of a person, such a dispute shall be
settled as decided by the Court.
111. To obtain name and surname: (1) Each person shall, after
birth, obtain the name as designated by his/her mother or father
according to one’s own religion, culture, usage or tradition.
If the mother or father of a person is not available or
is not likely to be available, he/she shall obtain the name is
designated by the guardian taking care of him/her.
Each person shall, after birth, be entitled to use after
his/her name the surname designated with consent of his/her
father and mother or, failing to reach consent, the surname of
his/her father.
Provided that a child whose paternity is not traced out
shall be entitled to use after his/her name the surname of his/her
mother.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(3), a child may use the surname of his/her father or mother or
of both.
If a dispute arises as to the surname of a person,
he/she shall be considered, unless proved otherwise, to have
used the surname of his/her father.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a child whose father or mother or both are not
traced out shall be entitled to use after his/her name the surname
given by the guardian taking care of him/her.
112. Name of a mother, father, grand-father and grandmother
may be stated: (1) Where the name of a mother, father and
grand-father, grand-mother requires to be stated under a law in a
formal, legal act and proceedings or deed, the concerned person
shall be entitled to state the name of his/her mother, father and
grand-father, grand-mother.
Where the father of the person who has to state the
name of his/her mother, father and grand-father and grandmother pursuant to sub-section (1) is not traced out, he/she
may state the name of a mother and the father and grand-mother
of the mother, and where even the name of a mother is not
traced out, it shall be sufficient to state, by recording the same
statement, the name of guardian if he/she is a minor, and only
his/her name if he/she is a major.
113. Birth of child to be registered: (1) Where a child is born to a
spouse, the mother, father or both have to file an application
within forty five days of the birth before the authority specified
by Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette
or if such a specification is not made, before the concerned
Village Development Committee or Municipality, as the case
may be, for registration of the birth.
(2) If an application is filed for registration of a birth after
expiry of such a period, a charge of fifty rupees shall be
applicable.
If an application is filed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned authority or the local body, as the case may be,
shall, after entering such details into the birth registration book
maintained according to law in its office, issue a certificate of
birth registration in the format as specified by the law to the
applicant.
In entering details in the registration book under
sub-section (3), there shall be entered the concerned child's
name, surname, birth date (year, month, date and day as well)
and place; name, surname and address of his/her mother, father.
The concerned authority or local authority, as the
case may be, shall have to forward the details entered, pursuant
to sub-section (3), into the registration book maintained in its
office up to the end of every month to the district administration
office, within a period of fifteen days of the first month
thereafter and the said office shall also enter such details up to
the end of every month into the birth registration book
maintained in its office for that purpose and forward the same
in every three months to the ministry specified by Government
of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(6) The concerned Ministry shall enter the details received
pursuant to sub-section (5) in the birth registration book
maintained for that purpose and maintain up dated description.
114. To care and maintain: (1) Every minor shall be cared and
maintained jointly by the mother and father.
(2) In caring and maintaining pursuant to sub-section (1),
the father and mother shall have to provide for, according to
their financial condition and capability, maintenance, health care,
education, sports, and entertainment and make other necessary
provisions.
115. To
under
custody
mother
father: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 114, where
matrimonial relationship between a husband and a wife is
lawfully dissolved, their minor child shall remain in the custody
of the mother or the father as provided herein below:-
in the case of a minor child below five years of age,
into the custody of a mother, if she so desires
irrespective of whether or not she has entered into a
second marriage;
in the case of a minor child above five years, except
where the mother concludes another marriage, in the
custody of a mother, if she so desires;
in other conditions, except in those referred to in
clause (a) or (b) , in custody of the father.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where the husband and the wife have entered a separate
agreement at the time of divorce or of judicial separation on
taking custody of a minor, such an agreement shall prevail over
the custody of a minor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), while deciding as to the custody of a child above the age of
ten years between the father and mother, the opinion of the
concerned child may also be sought.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the mother or the father, as the case may be,
under whose custody a minor is living, dies, the surviving
father or mother, as the case may be, shall have to take the
minor into his/her custody without any delay.
Provided that where the mother has already concluded
another marriage, she is not obliged to take a minor above five
years' age into her custody.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section,
where the husband and wife separated lawfully have a minor, the
maintenance, education, upbringing and heath care of such a
minor shall be according to the agreement concluded, if any,
between the husband and wife and in absence of such an
agreement, it shall be as follows:-
In the case of a minor below five years of age, it
shall be mother's responsibility,
In the case of a minor having attained the age of five
years, but not attained ten years, it shall be the
responsibility of the father;
In case of a minor attaining the age of ten years it
shall be the responsibility of the mother or father
with whom the child desires to live.
116. To take necessary care and provide maintenance: (1) The
father or mother, as the case may be, who takes a minor in
custody pursuant to Section 115 shall have to take care of and
provide maintenance to such a minor and in so taking care and
providing maintenance, the provisions referred to in sub-section
(2) of Section 114 shall be applicable mutatis mutandis.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where the income of the father or mother who does not take
custody of the child is higher than that of the father or mother
who takes custody of the child, such a mother or father shall
have to provide for the purpose of maintenance, education and
upbringing of such a minor, the expense as agreed upon between
such a father or mother and in absence of such agreement, as
specified by the court.
117. Facility to visit to be provided: (1)In cases where matrimonial
relationship is lawfully dissolved or the mother or father are
living separately, the minor shall be allowed to visit, from time
to time, the father if he/she is living in custody of a mother and
the mother if he/she is living in custody of the father or by the
consent of mother and father, to stay with either of them for
sometime.
Provided that if it appears that the interest of the minor is
likely to be prejudiced in availing the facility to such visit or
stay, the court may issue an order prohibiting such a visit or stay.
The frequency of visiting to or the period of staying
with the father or mother, as the case may be, pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as fixed by the concerned mother and father
in absence of such fixation, as ordered by the court.
During the stay of the minor with his/her father or
mother, as the case may be, pursuant to this Section, provisions
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 114 shall be applicable
mutatis mutandis..
118. Minor's rights to exist: (1) Notwithstanding the matrimonial
relationship between the husband and wife is dissolved pursuant
to this Chapter, the rights of a child born from them, over the
father, mother and the obligation of the father, mother to
him/her shall stand existed.
(2) Notwithstanding a person's biological father, mother
cannot become husband and wife in accordance with this
Chapter, such a person's legal right over such a father and
mother and the obligation of such a father, mother to such a
person shall stand existed.
119. Home not to be left without consent: (1) A child shall not,
without the consent of the parent, be entitled to live separately
from his/her parent.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), a child may live separately from the parent in the following
circumstances:-
If one is separated from the parent with or without
obtaining partition according to law,
If he/she concludes a marriage,
If she or he attains at least twenty two years of age,
If he/she is already employed.
120. Minor not to work as labor: A minor who is entitled to be
engaged in a work according to law as labor cannot work as
labor without the consent of the parent.
121. To be according to decision of father, mother: If a dispute
arises as to a matter to be decided in respect of the right and
interest of the minor born from the father, mother who cannot
conclude a marriage between them or whose matrimonial
relationship is dissolved pursuant to this Code, the decision
made by the father or mother, as the case may be, with whom
such a minor is living shall prevail.
122. A child to honor, respect and care mother, father: (1) Every
child shall have to treat his/her parent with honor and respect.
(2) Every child shall, according to his/her capacity, have
to provide necessary care, maintenance, medical treatment to
his/her parent notwithstanding living in an undivided family or
separately.
123. Limitation: If a separate time-limit has been specified in this
Chapter with regard to filing a statement of claims, it shall be
according to the same and in other cases, the person who is
aggrieved from an act carried out under this Chapter may file a
complaint within a period of six months from the date of
carrying out of such an act.

Chapter-5
Provision concerning Parental Authority
124. To be under supervision and control of the parent: (1) A
minor shall live under the supervision, oversight, control or
authority of parent.
The minor living under sub-section (1) shall have to
obey lawful order or direction given by parent.
125. Parental authority to be exercised jointly: (1) The parent who
may exercise the authority over, fulfill responsibility and
discharge duties towards their child pursuant to this Chapter
shall have to jointly exercise the authority and fulfill obligations
and discharge duty with the consent of both.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), the authority to be exercised, responsibility to be fulfilled
and duties to be discharged under the said sub-section shall be
exercised,
fulfilled
discharged
following
circumstances by the following father or mother, as the case
may be:-
If anyone among father or mother dies, by the
surviving mother or father;
If either the mother or father is of unsound mind, by
the mother or father of sound mind, during the
period of such state of mind;
Where the matrimonial relationship between the
mother, father is dissolved or they have been living
separate according to law, by the father, or mother
who has taken the minor under custody,
By the mother if the father of a minor is not traced
126. Power, responsibility and duty of the person exercising
parental authority: The power of, the responsibility to be
fulfilled and the duties to be discharged by the father or mother,
as the case may be, who is entitled to exercise parental authority
pursuant to this Chapter, shall be as follows:-
to keep the minor with him/her, provide company
and watch the minor's works, actions and behaviors;
to provide food and clothes and to teach him/her to
eat, wear and labor;
to provide affection and love;
to inculcate in him/her social dignity, decency,
good-behavior, morals, rites, culture, customs and to
educate him/her to behave accordingly;
to provide moral education like honesty, self
confidence, self-help, integrity, labor, discipline
based on social values;
to be careful of physical and mental health, to
provide and cause to be provided medical treatment;
to provide opportunity, according to necessity, for
sports and entertainment;
to make available read-worthy and message-oriented
educational materials;
to guide to remain loyal to the family, community,
society, nation and state;
to prevent from detrimental habits, bad association
and obscene matter;
to teach him/her to obey order, to honor and revere,
to do or cause to be done any act whatsoever
required for development of physical, mental and
intellectual personality.
127. Not to discriminate: The parent shall not discriminate in any
way in the maintenance, education and upbringing, sports,
medical treatment or entertainment facility of their children on
the grounds of son or daughter or between sons or between
daughters.
128. Special care to be taken: (1) If a child is physically or mentally
handicapped or disabled or has contracted a deadly disease such
as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or Hepatitis B, the
parent shall have to take special care of and provide special
treatment and protection to such a child.
Explanation: for the purpose of this Chapter, the term
"physically or mentally handicapped" means a physically
or mentally impaired person who himself/herself is unable
or incapable to carryout daily work.
In order to make the child financially self-reliant in
the future by having arrangements for providing special medical
treatment under sub-section (1), the parent shall have to make,
according to their own financial conditions and capacity,
arrangements for imparting special education or training.
129. Disciplinary action may be taken: If the parent considers it
appropriate to take any disciplinary action against a minor child
living under their supervision, oversight, control or authority
pursuant to this Chapter to improve his/her behavior, habits and
conduct, such parent may take such disciplinary action.
Provided that a cruel, inhumane and torturous treatment
can not be made to a child.
130. Deemed to be authority to exercise power: If the parent
appoints a teacher for the education and upbringing of a child,
admit a child into an educational institute for acquiring
education, he/she shall be deemed to have given authority to the
teacher so appointed or the headmaster or teacher of such
institute to exercise the power under Section 129 in respect of
education and upbringing.
131. Other person too may exercise parental power: Where a
minor is living with the guardian for reason of death of both the
mother and the father, a mother concludes another marriage
following the death of the father or both the father and the
mother become a person of unsound mind, his/her guardian may
exercise the authority, fulfill the responsibility and discharge the
duty, to be exercised, fulfilled and discharged by the parent
under this Chapter.
132. Restriction may be imposed to exercise parental authority: If
a complaint filed by a person or a child welfare organization
incorporated pursuant to law specifying that the person entitled
to exercise the authority has committed the following act against
a minor is proved from an inquiry, the court may prevent such a
person from exercising such authority:-
if cruel, inhumane or torturous punishment is
inflicted or treated;
if a child is neglected or disregarded or abused from
time to time;
if a child is employed into immoral or sexual
vocation;
if a child is employed in a work likely to endanger
body, life or health;
if loss to him/her is caused by expending his/her
property, against his/her interest or such property is
sold with the intention of buying oneself later on;
if a child is induced to become a Sanyasi, monk or
fakir;
if a child is employed to begging, except in cases
while observing religious or cultural rites, or
if one is employed in a work to be constituted
offense under law.
Where a restriction is imposed pursuant to subsection (1), the court shall have to appoint a guardian according
to law authorizing him/her to exercise the parental authority as
regard such a minor.
Where a guardian is appointed pursuant to subsection (2) to exercise parental authority such a guardian may
exercise the parental authority under this Chapter in consonance
with the interest of a minor.
If the person who is prevented from exercising the
parental authority pursuant to sub-section (1) files a petition
before the court promising that he/she shall not repeat the act
referred to in the said sub-section, the court may remove the
restriction imposed upon him/her and revoke the appointment
under sub-section (2).
133. Parental authority to terminate: (1) The parental authority to
which the parent are entitled to exercise pursuant to this Chapter
over a child shall be deemed to have been terminated in the
following circumstances:-
if the minor attains the age of eighteen years,
he/she
lives
separately
after
getting
employment.
Provided that where a child is physically or mentally
handicapped, the parental authority over him/her shall, except in
cases where he/she is living separately by concluding a marriage,
shall not be terminated.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), except as provided for in this Chapter, the relation, duty,
liability and responsibility of mother and father and son and
daughter towards each other shall stand existed for life long.
134. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-6
Provision concerning Guardianship
135. To be considered a guardian: A person appointed or liable
under this Chapter to protect the rights, interest of an
incompetent or a quasi-competent person shall be considered to
be a guardian.
136. Priority order of guardian: (1) Subject to other Sections of
this Chapter, a person of the following priority order shall, ipso
facto, be a guardian of an incompetent or a quasi-incompetent
person:-
a husband or wife of undivided family;
a father or mother;
a son, widow daughter-in-law, unmarried daughter;
a separated husband or wife;
a separated son, widow daughter-in-law, unmarried
daughter;
a grand-father or grand-mother;
a grand-son or unmarried grand-daughter;
(h) a grand-father, grand mother on mother's parent side,
maternal uncle, maternal aunty,
an elder or younger brother or an unmarried elder or
younger sister;
a married grand-daughter;
a married elder or younger sister.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1) the following person shall be a guardian in the following
conditions:-
where there are more than one person in one
priority order eligible to be a guardian, the person
mutually agreed by them, and in absence of such an
agreement, the person designated by the court.
in the case of a person of sound mind and having
attained the age of fourteen years, a person of
his/her choice.
Provided that in so choosing a guardian, a
deed thereof shall be executed and be certified by
the court.
in the case of a minor of a spouse whose
matrimonial relationship is dissolved, the father or
mother who provides maintenance cost to him/her,
if a person of first priority order declines to be a
guardian or does not act in the capacity of a guardian,
the person of the following priority order shall act in
that capacity.
Provided that if a person of lower order is so
becomes a guardian, he/she shall have to certify
from the court of the fact that he/she is a guardian.
137. Other person to be considered a guardian: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136, where a guardianship to an
incompetent or a quasi-incompetent person is provided by a
person other than the one referred to in that Section, the person
so providing guardianship shall be considered to be a guardian
of such a person.
Provided that the person to be so guardian shall have to
cause the fact of being a guardian to be certified from the court.
138. Organization to be considered a guardian: (1) If a child living
in organization such as child welfare house, orphanage or
children's organization established with the object of the welfare
and protection of the interest of children who has not a guardian,
such an organization itself shall be considered to be a guardian.
Any act to be done on behalf of such a child shall be
done by the chief of such an organization.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter and Chapter -
7, "Chief" means the chief executive officer of that organization
or the chairperson, general manager, managing director or any
other officer acting in that capacity.
139. Guardian may be appointed by a court: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 136 or 137, the court may, in any
of the following circumstances, appoint a particular person as
guardian, specifying reasons therefor:-
If the concerned local body files a petition to
appoint a guardian in case a person declines to be a
guardian pursuant to Section 136;
If a concerned person files a petition before the
court to appoint a guardian.
In appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall have to consider whether or not the rights,
interest or protection of such an incompetent or quasi-competent
person may be secured.
In appointing a guardian in the circumstances
referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall have to obtain the
consent also of the person to be appointed as a guardian.
After appointing a guardian pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall have to give a written notice thereof to the
person to be a guardian and the local body.
140. Supervisor may be designated: (1) Where a guardian is
appointed by a court pursuant to Section 139, the court may, if it
considers necessary to inquire the act and activities of such a
guardian, designate a person as supervisor.
The supervisor designated pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall inquire the act and action of the guardian and submit a
report thereof to the court.
Where guardianship is terminated pursuant to

Section 148, supervisoryship shall also, ipso facto, be deemed to
be terminated.
141. Disqualifications for a guardian: None of the following
persons may become a guardian:-
an incompetent or a quasi-competent person;
a person who has committed an act against rights
and interest of an incompetent or a quasiincompetent person;
a person sentenced by a court of imprisonment for
three years or more.
Provided that this clause shall not be deemed
to cause obstruction for being the guardian of the
husband, wife, father, mother, son, daughter, grandfather, grand-mother, grand-son, grand-daughter,
brothers and sisters.
a person considered disqualified by the court to be a
guardian.
142. Maintenance and care of incompetent or quasi-competent
person: (1) The guardian shall have to make arrangement for
the maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care of
incompetent
quasi-competent
person
under
his/her
guardianship from the property of such a person, if any, and if
not; from the property of the guardian himself/herself.
(2) The arrangements for maintenance, health, education,
entertainment and care of the an incompetent or quasi-competent
person pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be made from the
movable property of such a person, if any; and where there is no
such property or the property to make arrangements for the
maintenance, health, education, entertainment and care is not
sufficient, his/her immovable property may be sold with the
prior-approval of court.
Provided that such an approval shall not be required to sell
immovable property where the husband, wife, father, mother,
son, daughter, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, or granddaughter is a guardian.
143. To supervise, protect and manage property: (1) A guardian
shall have to supervise and protect the property of the
incompetent
quasi-competent
person
under
his/her
guardianship.
A guardian may carry on any business or transaction
by investing the property of the person under his/her
guardianship.
144. To keep exact books and accounts: (1) A guardian shall have
to keep exact books and accounts of the expenditure incurred on
the maintenance, health, education, and care of an incompetent
or quasi-competent person under his/her guardianship, and of
the income and expenditure from the management of such a
person's property and the inventory proving the ownership of
such property.
Provided that where a husband, wife, father, mother, son,
daughter, grand-father, grand-mother, grand-son, grand/daughter
is the guardian of the incompetent or quasi-competent person,
such books and account shall not be required to be maintained.
The guardian shall have to submit the books and
accounts and the inventory proving ownership of property kept
pursuant to sub-selection (1) within one year from the date of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person having attained
majority lawfully or notified in writing the court that he/she is
competent to carry out act and activities, to such a person.
If an incompetent or quasi-competent person dies at
the time when he/she was under guardianship, the guardian shall
have to submit the books and accounts and the inventory
proving ownership of such property under sub-section (1)
within six months from his/her death, to the nearest of a
successor of such person.
145. Legal proceedings may be instituted or suit may be
defended: A guardian may for protection of rights, interest of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person under one's own
guardianship, institute a legal proceeding against a person or
defend a suit filed against him/her.
Provided that the guardian cannot so renounce a claim of
or plea to or to execute deed of compromise in a civil suit to
which an incompetent or quasi-competent person is claimant or
defendant as to cause a loss to him/her from which he/she shall
be aggrieved.
146. Act may be carried out on behalf of incompetent or quasicompetent person: Subject to the provisions contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, the guardian may carry out an act on
behalf of an incompetent or quasi-competent person that he/she
can carry out according to law.
147. Act may be carried out subject to only to terms:
Notwithstanding anything contained in other Section of this
Chapter, where a person is designated a guardian for an
incompetent or quasi-competent person with specification of
certain terms, such a guardian shall have the authority to carry
out only the act under such terms.
148. Termination of guardianship: Guardianship shall be deemed to
be terminated in any of the following circumstances:-
if a petition filed by the guardian stating that he/she
is unable to be a guardian is accepted by court;
if the guardian or the incompetent or quasicompetent person under guardianship dies;
if the incompetent or quasi-competent person
becomes competent;
if the court removes the guardian at the request of
the incompetent or quasi-competent person under
guardianship.
If a guardianship is terminated pursuant to subsection (1) and the person who was a guardian and the person
who was under guardianship are surviving, the person who had
worked as guardian shall have to continue to maintain and take
care of the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his/her
guardianship until another guardian is appointed.
Where a guardianship is terminated pursuant to subsection (1), the limitation, time of a legal proceedings or time
for appearance, to be carried out by the guardian pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be deemed to have elapsed, from the date on
which guardianship so terminated until next guardian is
appointed.
149. Not to be transferred to a successor: Where a guardianship is
terminated upon death of a guardian pursuant to Section 148, the
right, authority and responsibility vested in him/her in the
capacity of a guardian shall not be transferred to his/her
successor.
Provided that in cases where another guardian requires to
be appointed for an incompetent or quasi-competent person,
he/she shall, in the capacity of the successor to the guardian,
have to maintain and take care of such incompetent or quasicompetent person until another guardian is appointed.
150. Expense may be recovered: Where a guardian has arranged
from his/her own property the maintenance, health, education,
sports, entertainment and care of the incompetent or quasicompetent person living under his/her guardianship, he/she may
recover the money so incurred from the property of the
incompetent or quasi-competent person remained under his/her
guardianship.
Provided that if the husband, wife, father, mother, son,
daughter, grand-father, grand-mother or grand-son or granddaughter is a guardian of the incompetent or quasi-competent
person, he/she shall not recover such expense.
151. Amount of loss may be recovered: If a guardian knowingly,
deceitfully, fraudulently or with malafide intention, causes loss
to the property of the incompetent or quasi-competent person
remained under his/her guardianship so as to be or not to be
benefited himself or herself, the incompetent or quasi-competent
person aggrieved from such a loss may recover the amount of
loss from such a guardian.
152. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such act.

Chapter-7
Provision concerning Curatorship
153. To be curator of minor: (1) Where the father and mother both
of a minor die or become insane or have disappeared or are
living
abroad
without
making
arrangements
proper
maintenance, care, supervision of the minor, and if such a minor
does not have a guardian according to Chapter 6, the person who
has taken custody of such a minor shall be required to act in the
capacity of the curator of such a minor, until the minor attains
the age of majority.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter:-
Where there is no information whether a person is
alive or dead from three months consecutively or a
person to whom it is natural to receive information
about
person
received
information about such a person during that period
or except in cases where information about him/her
is received, such a person shall be deemed to be
disappeared.
If a person visits a foreign country for three months
or more, he/she shall be deemed to live in a foreign
country.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a person may appoint a separate curator for
maintenance and care of his/her child.
154. Curator of a person of unsound mind: (1) Where a person of
unsound mind does not have a guardian under Chapter-6, a
person may act as a curator for maintenance, care of such a
person and for management of his/her property.
Where there is no person under sub-section (1) or
the person is not ascertained, the person under whose custody,
supervision or oversight the person of unsound mind is living
for the time being, shall be a curator of such a person.
155. Mother to become curator of a minor: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 153, in cases where the father of a
minor below the age of ten years is dead or disappeared or is in
abroad, such minor's mother herself shall be his/her curator even
through she has concluded a second marriage.
156. Body corporate could be a curator: (1) If an orphan child or a
person of unsound mind having no guardian remains under
supervision, protection or custody of a body corporate, such a
body corporate shall be a curator of such a person.
Where a body corporate is curator pursuant to subsection (1), the person working as executive chief of such body
corporate shall exercise the authority of a curator.
157. Court may appoint curator: (1) Where there is no person who
could be a curator according to Chapter-6 of this Part or a
person declines to be a curator, the concerned local body shall
file a petition stating the details thereof before the court to
appoint a curator of the concerned person.
In filing petition pursuant to sub-section (1), there
shall be stated the name, surname, address and profession of the
persons likely to be a curator of the concerned person and a
document of the consent given by the person likely to be a
curator to work as curator.
Where a petition is filed pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall issue an order for appointing an appropriate
person out of the persons whose names are submitted pursuant
to sub-section (2).
A person to be appointed a curator pursuant to subsection (3) shall have to submit a deed of consent to work in that
capacity before the court.
158. Curator's qualifications: A natural person who is capable to
conclude a contract pursuant to this Code and is not bankrupt or
a legal person which is in operation after being registered
pursuant to a law may be a curator.
159. Curator to take custody of property: (1) A person who
becomes a curator pursuant to this Chapter shall have to take
custody of, manage and operate movable and immovable
property.
A person who takes custody of property pursuant to
sub-section (1) shall have to maintain, provide medical
treatment and educate the person whom he/she has taken into
custody according to his/her capacity from the property he/she
has taken into custody.
160. Property may be used: A person who becomes a curator may
expend all the returns obtained from the property under his/her
curatorship for the maintenance, education and interest of the
person whom he/she has taken into his/her custody.
161. Immovable property may be expended by court's approval:
(1) Where the movable property of the person living under
curatorship is insufficient for the maintenance, education or
medical treatment of such a person, the person who becomes a
curator may file petition for permission of the court for sale for
that purpose, of immovable property, specifying reasons therefor.
Where a petition is filed pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the court may, if it finds the grounds for sale of such immovable
property reasonable, grant permission to sell the immovable
property or a part thereof in accordance with the conditions as it
considers appropriate.
162. Property to be managed rationally and carefully: (1) A
person who becomes a curator shall have to take reasonable care
of the property under his/her curatorship, in good faith like that
of his/her own property and operate and manage it rationally and
carefully.
The concerned curator shall be responsible for any
loss or damage caused to the property under curatorship for
reasons of not having operated and managed property pursuant
to sub-Section (1).
Provided that he/she shall not be responsible for loss or
damage of such property due to natural calamities.
If a complaint is filed of not having operated and
managed property pursuant to sub-Section (1), the court may
remove the concerned person from curatorship.
163. Transfer of title may be annulled: If a curator sells to
himself/herself or any member of his/her family the immovable
property of the person living under his/her custody with
malafide intention of depriving such a person of his/her title or
except in cases where succession is devolved within three years
of the date of sale, the title transferred in any way to such
person's name, may be annulled.
164. Curatorship to be terminated: (1) Curatorship shall be
deemed to have been terminated in the following conditions:-
In case of a minor, if he/she attains the age of
eighteen years,
In case of a person of unsound mind, if he/she
becomes sane,
In case the mother, father of the minor or both take
minor into their custody,
In case a guardian is appointed for a minor or person
of unsound mind;
In case the person disappeared is found,
In case a court removes a person from curatorship
pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section 162.
In case the mother, father of the minor who are in
abroad return,
In case a curator is not qualified or no more
qualified pursuant to Section 158;
In case the curator or the person giving curatorship
dies.
Where curatorship is terminated pursuant to sub Section (1), the person who used to be a curator shall promptly
return to the concerned person the property taken into custody in
the capacity of a curator.
165. Property may be handed over: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person is personally
unable to protect and manage property under his/her title,
ownership or possession for the reason that he/she has to go
elsewhere by leaving the place where he/she resides, he/she may
appoint an agent therefor and entrust such property to such a
person.
166. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter -8
Provision concerning Adoption
167. To be deemed adopted son or adopted daughter: If a person
accepts a son or daughter of another person as his/her son or
daughter, such a son or daughter shall be deemed to be an
adopted son or daughter.
168. Adoption not to be effected contrary to right and interest of
child: No person shall effect adoption contrary to rights and
interests of a child.
169. Prohibition on adoption by a person having child: (1) No
person having his/her own son shall adopt a son and no person
having his/her own daughter shall adopt a daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), if a man or woman who is living separately by the reason of
judicial separation, by receiving partition in property or by
separating bread and board from the husband or wife, as the case
may be, and does not have a biological child, such a person may
adopt a child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter and Chapter
9, "judicial separation" means a circumstance under which
a person obtains partition in property according to the
order of court or lives separately according to law or lives
separately after separation of bread and board from other
coparceners.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1) or (2), if a person having biological child files a petition
before the court for adoption of another children disclosing
therein his/her financial capacity to make arrangements for their
maintenance, health care, education and care and if the
statement of petitioner is found to be reasonable upon inquiry
into such a petition, the court may grant permission for adoption.
170. Adoption may be effected: (1) The following person may effect
adoption of a child:-
A spouse to whom no child has born even up to ten
years of the marriage,
An unmarried woman having completed forty five
years of age, a widow, a divorcee woman or a
woman living separately following a judicial
separation, having no son or daughter.
An unmarried man having completed forty five years
of age a widower, divorcee or judicially separated
man, having no son or daughter.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), the following person cannot effect adoption:-
One who is of unsound mind,
One who is convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude from a court or
One who does not have financial capacity to
afford maintenance, health care, education,
sports facility, entertainment and care of
children.
The husband and wife of an undivided family shall
effect adoption with each other's consent.
171. Adoption not to be effected: (1) No one shall effect adoption
of any of the following persons:-
One who completes fourteen years of age;
One who is the only son or daughter;
Provided that this provision shall not apply in
the circumstance referred to in sub-Section (2) of

Section 173,
One who is adopted for once;
Provided that this provision shall not apply
where the adoption is annulled according to law;
One who is in the higher degree of relationship than
the person adopting the son or daughter;
One who is a non-Nepali citizen.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of
sub-Section (1) in the case of a person within the relation of
three generations or the child born to the ex-husband of the wife,
adoption may be effected even though the person has completed
the age of fourteen years.
172. Difference of age between adopter and adoptee: There must
be at least the age difference of twenty five years between the
adopting and adopted person.
173. Consent to be sought for adoption: (1) In effecting adoption of
a child consent of both the father and the mother of the child
shall have to be obtained in writing, if both of them are
surviving; and consent of the surviving father or mother, s the
case may be, shall have to be obtained if either of them is
surviving.
Provided that where the matrimonial relationship between
the husband and the wife is dissolved or the husband and wife
are living separately by receiving partition of property or by
separation of bread and board from other coparceners, adoption
may be effected by obtaining consent of the person with whom,
out of the father or mother, the child has been living.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), adoption of a child whose father and mother are not traced
or surviving or a child whose father and mother are surviving
but who has been maintained or cared by a person or
organization following the solemnization of another marriage
either by father or mother may be effected by obtaining consent
in writing of the person or organization so maintaining or caring
a child.
While adopting the child above ten years pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (2), a written consent of such a child shall
also have to be obtained.
The written consent under sub-Section (3) shall be
executed by the concerned child in the presence of his/her father,
mother or the guardian exercising parental authority.
Before obtaining consent pursuant to this Section,
the person putting the child up for adoption and the child shall
be informed of the meaning, legal status and consequences of
the adoption.
No financial inducement of any type shall be given
in obtaining consent pursuant to this Section and such consent
shall have to be given voluntarily.
174. Adoption deemed to have been effected by spouse: Where
adoption was effected by a husband or a wife living separately
after obtaining partition in property or by separation of bread
and board from other coparceners or judicial separation and the
husband and wife live jointly after effecting adoption, the
adoption effected before living so jointly shall be deemed to
have been effected by both the spouse.
175. Court to give order for adoption: (1) If a person is desirous of
effecting adoption of a child, he/she shall have to file a petition
before a concerned court along with a duly executed deed of
adoption.
If, upon inquiring into the deed received pursuant to
sub-Section (1), the court deems it appropriate to grant
permission to the petitioner for adoption, the court shall have to
issue an order granting permission for adoption and shall
authenticate such a deed.
If the court considers from the inquiry conducted
pursuant to sub-Section (2) that it is not appropriate to grant
permission to the petitioner for adoption, the court shall issue an
order accordingly and give information thereof to the petitioner.
176. Rights and authority of adopted child: (1) The rights, powers,
obligations and responsibility of an adopted child shall be equal
to that of the biological son or daughter of the adoptive parents.
Even if a child is born to a person who has already
adopted a person, the status of such adopted child as equal to
that of the biological child shall not be prejudiced.
177. Surname of adopted child: (1) An adopted child may use the
surname of the adoptive father or mother or of the both.
Provided that:
If an adopted child so desires, he/she may use the
surname also of his/her biological father and mother.
If the adoption is revoked, the surname of the person
previously adopted shall revert to the surname of
his/her biological father or mother.
178. Prohibition on claiming in share of property of father and
mother: An adopted person shall be entitled to make a claim of
a share of property of his/her biological father, mother.
Provided that,-
Where adoption is revoked, he/she may claim
partition in property of his/her biological father,
mother,
Where he/she has already received partition in
property at the time of adoption, he/she may receive
such property as well.
179. Adopter's obligation: (1) The obligation of the person adopting
a child shall be the following:-
To make arrangements for maintenance, health care
sports, entertainment and proper education of the
adopted child according to his/her reputation and
capacity as if he/she were his/her own child;
To protect rights and interests of the adopted child.
To exercise parental authority as referred to in

Chapter-5 of this Part.
If the person adopting a child does not fulfill the
obligations under sub-Section (1), the adopted child may live
separately by obtaining a partition share of property.
180. Obligation of adopted child: The obligation of an adopted
child shall be as follows:-
To make, arrangements for maintenance, health care
and care of adoptive father, mother according to
his/her reputation and capacity;
To protect, look after and properly manage property
of the adoptive parent;
To protect the rights and interest of the adoptive
parent.
181. Facility to visit and making correspondences to be provided:
The adoptive parent shall have to provide facility to the adopted
child to visit to or make correspondence with his/her biological
father, mother from time to time.
182. Adoption to be Void: If a person effects adoption in
contravention of Section 169, sub-Section (1) and clauses (a)
and (b) of sub-Section (2) of Section 170 and Sections 171, 172
and 173, such an adoption shall ipso facto be void.
183. Voidable Adoption: (1) In cases where a person adopting a
child fails to fulfill the obligations referred to in Section 179,
the adopted child may cause the adoption to be void.
Provided that where such adopted child has already
received partition share of property, he/she shall not be entitled
to cause the adoption to be void.
(2) A the person adopting a child may cause the adoption
to be void in any of the following circumstances:-
If the adopted child fails to fulfill the obligations
referred to in Section 180;
If the adopted child expels him/her from home or
causes physical or mental torture from time to time;
If the adopted child abuses his/her property, or
If the adopted child lives separately without his/her
consent for three years or more, deserting the
adopted person.
The provisions referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of
sub-Section (2) shall not be applicable in case of the married
adopted daughter.
184. Termination of adoption: (1) If an adoption becomes void
pursuant to Section 182 or 183, the relationship between the
person adopting a child and the adopted child shall be deemed to
have been terminated.
If the relationship between the person adopting a
child and adopted child is terminated pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the rights, authority and obligation vested in the adopted child in
that capacity shall also be terminated.
Provided that the facility enjoyed, authority acquired or
exercised and obligation fulfilled during the validity period of
adoption shall not be prejudiced.
185. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out pursuant
to this Chapter may file a complaint within one year from the
date of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter -9
Provision concerning inter-country adoption
186. Provision concerning inter-country adoption to be deemed
established: If any foreigner accepts a child of Nepali citizen
or of a foreigner residing in Nepal as an adopted son or an
adopted daughter, it shall be deemed to be a provision of an
inter-country adoption.
187. Adoption not to be effected without obtaining permission:
No foreigner shall be allowed to effect adoption of any
child of any Nepali citizen or of a foreigner residing in Nepal
without obtaining a permission from Government of Nepal.
Permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only to the citizen or spouse of those countries which
are opened by Government of Nepal by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette for inter-country adoption in Nepal.
188. Greater interest of a child to be considered in granting
permission for adoption: (1) Before granting a permission to a
foreigner for effecting adoption, Government of Nepal shall
have to consider whether or not the best interest of the child will
be secured, his/her human rights will be protected and such
child will be abducted, sold, trafficked or abused otherwise.
While considering the matters pursuant to sub Section (1), permission for adoption under this Chapter shall be
granted only if it is found to be appropriate to grant a permission
to a foreigner to adopt a child.
189. Permission may be granted for adoption: Permission may be
granted to a foreigner to adopt any of the following children
who has stayed in a children home at least for a period of ninety
days:-
An orphan child,
A voluntarily abandoned child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
"Children home" means a child welfare home and
orphanage
established
objective
protecting rights and interests of children and
includes the children home or balmandir (children
house) established by Government of Nepal.
"Orphan child" means any of the following children
who is certified as an orphan from the District
Administration Office:-
1) An unclaimed child found by the police,
2) An unclaimed child found in a hospital or a
health organization,
3) A child either of whose parents is not traced
out, or
4) A child whose both parents are dead and who
possesses
property
maintenance.
"Voluntarily abandoned child" means any of the
following children surrendered to the custody of a
children home through the District Administration
Office, after failing to make arrangements for their
maintenance and education by any of the following
persons by executing a deed relating thereto:-
in the case of a child whose father is dead or
disappeared and mother has concluded another
marriage, by such a mother,
in cases where, due to birth of more than one
child,
their
maintenance,
education
financially unaffordable, by the father and the
mother.
in the cases of a child, who is born in more
than one number, whose father is dead or is
disappeared or is of unsound mind, and
his/her mother can not financially afford
his/her maintenance and education, by such a
mother.
in the cases of a child, who is born in more
than one number, mother is dead or of
unsound mind and the father can not
financially afford his/her maintenance, by the
father of such a child.
in the case of an orphan child who has no
property, by the guardian.
190. Foreigner eligible for adopting a son or daughter: (1) The
following foreigner may be granted permission for adoption of a
child of Nepalese citizen or of a foreigner domiciled in Nepal:-
A spouse to whom child is not born even up to ten
years of their marriage,
A woman who has completed forty-five years but
has not completed fifty five years of age, a widow,
divorcee or judicially separated woman having no
child,
A man who has completed forty-five years but has
not completed fifty five years, a widower, divorcee
or judicially separated man having no child.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), a foreigner of the following conditions shall not be granted
permission for adoption:-
One who is of unsound mind,
One who has been convicted of an offense
involving moral turpitude from a court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where a foreign country's law permits the citizen of that
country to adopt more than one child, he/she may adopt a child
even though he/she has a child.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, a citizen of the country where Nepalese citizen is
forbidden to adopt a child or where the right of the adopted
child and naturally born child are discriminatory, citizen of such
a country is not permitted to adopt a child in Nepal.
(5) There shall be the difference of age of at least
twenty five years between the foreign couple, woman or man
under sub-Section (1) and the child to be adopted.
191. Provision concerning Inter-country Adoption Board: In
order to act as a central agency for the recommendation for
granting a permission to a foreigner for adoption of a child
pursuant to this Chapter, Government of Nepal shall, by a
notification published in the Nepal Gazette, form an Intercountry Adoption Board.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter "Board"
means the Inter-country Adoption Board.
(2) The functions, powers and duties of the Board, in
addition to those referred to elsewhere in this Chapter, shall be
as follows:-
To frame and recommend to Government of Nepal
policy on inter-country adoption,
coordinate
various
agencies
matters
of inter-country adoption,
To prevent undue financial and other advantage
likely to be exchanged while giving for adoption
and while adopting;
To collect and protect information relating to
children and persons desirous for adoption and
exchange such information to each other;
To make the procedures for effecting adoption
easier and simplified,
To share with central agencies or organizations of
other countries on procedures and experience with
regard to giving for adoption and adopting a child;
To make available any information required by
central adoption agency or the concerned other
public agency of other countries about the
condition of adopted son or daughter;
To prevent child abuse, exploitation, trafficking or
kidnapping likely to happen in effecting adoption
and to protect Nepali children from any other
practice likely to harm children;
To make recommendation to Government of Nepal
to fix the charges applicable for adoption;
To specify the format of application to be filed for
adoption,
arrangements
maintaining
confidentially
records
children,
their
biological father, mother or adoptive father,
mother;
To carry out such other functions relating to intercountry adoption as may be required.
Other matters including the procedures relating to
meeting of the Board shall be as determined by the Board itself.
192. Children home to be listed: A children home being operated
upon registration pursuant to law and desirous of carrying out
the business relating to inter-country adoption shall have to file
a petition accompanied by the following documents and details
before the Board :-
Statute of children home and document
relating to renewal thereof,
A recommendation made by the Central Child
Welfare Board to the effect that the children
home is operated and managed in accordance
with the specified minimum standard and
guidelines,
Details of the physical property of the children
home.
The Board shall, if it deems the request of the
applicant reasonable upon an inquiry on the petition received
pursuant to sub-Section (1), enlist such a home as an
organization authorized to carry out the business of intercountry adoption and notify the applicant.
A children’s home shall get it renewed from the
Board in every two years to maintain its registration.
193. Suspension or removal of a children home from list: (1) If a
children home is found to have submitted false statement,
committed or is about to commit an act in contravention of law
or this Chapter, the Board may suspend, by specifying period or
remove such children home from the list.
Provided that before suspending or removing from the list,
the home shall not be deprived of an opportunity to defend itself.
194. To forward details of children to selection committee: A
children home shall forward to the selection committee under

Section 198 individual personal details and documents stated
herein below about a the children who may be granted for
adoption to a foreigner and provide a notice thereof to the
Board:-
Name and recently taken photograph of children;
Health report of last six months of the children;
In the case of a Nepali children, the document
revealing that his/her domestic adoption within the
country failed despite making a reasonable efforts
for it,
In the case of an orphan,-
In the case of an unclaimed child found in a
road, street or public place, the letter issued by
the concerned police stating the same, if found
in unclaimed condition in a hospital, the letter
issued by the concerned hospital stating the
reason for leaving the child in the hospital and
if found in other places, a letter, including a
public inquiry document, issued by the nearby
police office;
A proof of a notice with thirty five days' time
having been published on a daily newspaper
of national level within seven days of
admission of a child as regards the claim of
child together with the photograph of the
child including the statement of the date of
admission of child, approximate age;
Where no claim is made over or information is
received about the said child from any person
within the period referred to in sub-clause (2),
poof of a notice with twenty one days time
having been published, after ten days' of
expiry of the period referred to in sub-clause
(2), containing the same statements,
A document issued by the concerned District
Administration Office certifying such a child
as an orphan, on the ground that no claim or
information was received even within the
period under sub-clause (3) or that the claim
or information received was baseless.
In the case of a voluntarily abandoned child,-
Certificate of birth registration,
Age and identifying mark of the child,
Name, address of the father, mother or other
guardians of the child and copy of their
citizenship certificates,
If the child is abandoned by a guardian other
than mother, father, document of appointment
of such a guardian,
Reason for abandonment of a child,
A recommendation made by the concerned
local body revealing the economic and social
conditions of the parent of the child,
Consent as stated in Section 173.
195. Listing of foreign organization or agency: (1) A foreign
organization or an agency desirous of carrying business relating
to inter-country adoption in Nepal shall have to file an
application accompanied by the following documents, before the
Board for listing of such an agency:-
Proof of having obtained approval from the
concerned body of the country of its incorporation to
carry out business relating to inter-country adoption,
A document which certifies that under the law of the
concerned country the status of an adopted son and
adopted daughter, as the case may be, is equal to
that of a biological son and daughter of a citizen of
that country,
A document which certifies that it has been carrying
out business relating to inter-country adoption at
least from three years,
A recommendation made by the embassy of the
concerned country accredited to Nepal or the
responsible body of the concerned country to the
effect that it has been working reliably in the field of
inter-country adoption, and
Other necessary document specified from time to
time by the Board.
If, from inquiry into the application received
pursuant to sub-Section (1), the Board finds the request of the
applicant is reasonable, it shall list such a foreign organization
or agency as an organization authorized to carry out business
relating to inter-country adoption and give a notice thereof to
the applicant.
A foreign organization or agency listed pursuant to
sub-Section (3) shall have to appoint its agent in Nepal and give
a notice thereof to the Board.
A foreign organization or agency listed pursuant to
sub-Section (2) shall, if it so desires, be required to renew in
every two year.
196. Foreign organization or agency may be suspended or
removed from list: (1) If a foreign organization or an agency
listed pursuant to Section 195 is found to have committed an
act in contravention of laws in force, this Chapter or the
direction of the Board, the Board may suspend, by specifying
period, or remove from the list such an organization or agency.
Provided that before so suspending or removing from list,
such an organization or agency shall not be deprived of an
opportunity to defend itself.
197. Application to be filed for adoption: (1) A foreigner or spouse
qualified under Section 190 and desirous of adopting a Nepali
child or of a child of a foreigner residing in Nepal shall have to
file an application before the Board, accompanied by the
following documents, through a foreign organization or agency
listed pursuant to Section 195 or the embassy of his/her country
in Nepal and where no such an embassy exists in Nepal, the
embassy designated for Nepal:-
applicant's birth registration certificate,
applicant's recently taken photograph,
photocopy of applicant's passport,
(d) a deed certifying the marital status of the applicant;
a certificate issued by a registered medical doctor as
regards the health of the applicant;
a certificate issued by the governmental body of the
concerned country to the effect that applicant bears
good characteristics and is not convicted guilty
from a court in a criminal charge involving moral
turpitude;
A document that certifies applicant's property and
income source;
applicant's social, psychological home study report,
age, sex and other details of the child sought for
adoption;
A consent letter issued by the government of his/her
country for adoption from Nepal;
(k) A guarantee letter issued by the government of the
concerned country or the embassy of that country in
Nepal or designated for Nepal to the effect that
under the law of the country of the applicant the
status of the child is equal to that of his/her own
biological child,
A guarantee letter issued by the government of the
applicant's home country, embassy of that country in
Nepal or the embassy designated for Nepal to the
effect that under the law of the country of the
applicant, he/she is fit for effecting adoption and has
the capacity to bear all responsibility including
maintenance, health care, education and protection
of the child to be adopted.
The document under sub-Section (1) shall be written
in English language or translated into English language by
an authorized body.
If it is found, from an inquiry into the application
received pursuant to sub-Section (1), that it is
appropriate to grant a permission for adoption
according to the request of the applicant, the Board
shall forward, by keeping confident the name and
address of the applicant, the details relating thereto
to the Selection Committee.
198. Provision concerning Selection Committee: For the purpose of
making recommendation as to which child shall be fit for
adoption by which foreigner, after matching the person desirous
of adoption and the child, Government of Nepal shall form a
selection committee by a notification published in the Nepal
Gazette.
199. To make recommendation by matching person effecting
adoption and child: After matching fitness of the applicant for
adoption and the child on the basis of the description relating to
the applicant received pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section
197, details relating to the child received pursuant to Section
194 and having regard also to the request of the applicant, the
selection committee shall recommend the name of the applicant
and the child before the Board.
200. Permissions to be granted for adoption: (1) If the Board finds,
from an inquiry into the recommendation received pursuant to

Section 199, appropriate to grant any child for adoption by a
foreigner, it shall recommend Government of Nepal accordingly.
(2) If Government of Nepal finds, from an inquiry, the
content of the recommendation made by the Board pursuant to
sub-Section (1) reasonable, it may grant a permission to the
applicant foreigner for adoption of such a child, according to the
recommendation of the Board.
(3) After a permission that has been granted pursuant to
sub-Section (2), Government of Nepal shall issue a certificate
relating thereto for that purpose.
(4) After a certificate has been issued pursuant to sub Section (3), inter-country adoption shall be deemed to have duly
been effected from Nepal.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
if the father, mother or guardian of the concerned child desires
to take back, prior to granting permission to foreigner for
adoption, his/her child, such a child may not be granted for
adoption.
If Government of Nepal grants a permission to a
foreigner pursuant to sub-Section (2) for adoption, the applicant
shall takeover the concerned child by being present personally.
Provided that if the applicant is a spouse and one of them
is unable to be present personally, the other may takeover the
child on the basis of the deed of consent executed by the absent
husband or wife, as the case may be.
(7) After permission is granted to a foreigner for adoption
of any child, Government of Nepal shall have to provide
information thereof to the central agency for inter-country
adoption of the country of the adoptive parent and also to the
embassy of the concerned country designated for Nepal, if any.
(8) A children home listed pursuant to Section 192, a
foreign organization or an agency listed pursuant to Section 195
or a foreigner or spouse having applied for adoption may file an
appeal before the Appellate Court designated by the Government
of Nepal by a notification published in the Nepal Gazette, if not
satisfied with a decision of Government of Nepal.
201. Special provision concerning selection of family for child
requiring special care: (1) Notwithstanding any thing
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the Board may prioritize
the families submitting application for adopting a child
requiring special care.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “child
requiring special care” means a child who requires special care
because of his/her physical or mental condition or because of
his/her unnatural or extra ordinary development or elder age
amongst the helpless child or voluntarily abandoned child.
The Board shall decide whether or not a child is the
child requiring special care,
Notwithstanding any thing contained elsewhere in
sub-section (1), in case any matter relating to the age, sex and
health of the child does not match with the type of the child
demanded by the family in the first priority while selecting the
family and the child requiring special care, the child requiring
special care who matches the type of the child demanded by
such family may be selected.
Other procedures relating to selection of family for
the child requiring special care and classification of such
children shall be as specified by Government of Nepal.
202. Special provision concerning permission of adoption: (1)
Notwithstanding any thing contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in
case any renowned foreign citizen desires to adopt a child pursuant to

Section 189, he/she may submit an application to the Board along with
a recommendation of the Head of the State, Head of the Government
or Foreign Minister of the concerned country.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, “renowned person”
means any of the following persons:-
a) The Head of the State, Head of the Government or Foreign
Minister of a foreign country;
b) A Nobel laureate;
c) Celebrity of international fame;
d) Any person or professional having an annual income of
more than three hundred thousand.
While inquiring into the application received pursuant to
sub-section (1), if the Board deems if fit to allow such a foreign
citizen to adopt a child as per his/her demand, it shall make
recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers accordingly.
In case a recommendation is made pursuant to sub-section
(2), the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers may allow
such a foreign citizen to adopt a child as per his/her demand.
203. Details to be forwarded: A foreigner who adopts a Nepali
child pursuant to this Chapter shall have to forward once a year
through the Nepalese embassy or consular general located in
his/her country or mission abroad and Government of Nepal the
details relating to the arrangements he/she has made for
maintenance, education and health of such a child until such a
child attains the age of majority according to the law of the
concerned country.
204. To monitor: (1) The Board itself may conduct monitoring
about whether a foreigner who has adopted a Nepali child has
made arrangements for the maintenance, medical care, education
and care of such a child or not or may, for that purpose, form
according to necessity, a sub-committee comprising also of the
representative of Nepalese embassy or consular general based in
that country, until such a child attains majority age.
The Board or the sub-committee formed pursuant to
sub-Section (1) may, for that purpose, monitor by visiting the
place where the child is residing.
The Board or sub-committee under sub-section (1)
shall submit a report of the monitoring conducted by it to
Government of Nepal.
The report under sub-Section (3) shall, inter alia,
contain the statement whether the best interest of the adopted
Nepalese child is secured when he/she is residing with the
adoptive parent or not.
If the report received pursuant to sub-Section (3)
contains a statement that the adopted Nepalese child's best
interest is not secured when he/she is residing with the adoptive
parent, Government of Nepal may, where such a child is able to
express his/her opinion or is above ten years age, by taking
his/her opinion as well, draw attention of the Government of the
concerned country through diplomatic channel.
Where the situation of the adopted Nepalese child is
not improved even after attention was drawn pursuant to sub Section (5), Government of Nepal may, by a notification
published in the Nepal Gazette, remove such a country from the
list of the countries opened for inter-country adoption from
Nepal.
205. Suit may be instituted: A suit may, subject to the law of the
concerned country, be filed on the grounds of failure to make
arrangements for proper maintenance, medical care, education
and care of the adopted child within one year from the date of
attaining majority age in the case of a minor and by the
Nepalese embassy or consular general based in the concerned
country from the date of commission of such an act, for
annulment of adoption.
206 Provision of the Code not to be applicable: (1) Provision of

Section 189 of this Chapter shall not be applicable for adoption
of the child of a foreigner residing in Nepal.
(2) Provisions on adoption provided for in Sections 171,
172, 173, 176, 177, 178, 179, and 181 shall be applicable also to
the adoption effected by a foreigner pursuant to this Chapter.
207. Limitation: In the case where a separate statutory limitation in
regard to filing a complaint is provided for in this Chapter, it
shall be accordingly and in other cases, a person aggrieved by an
act carried out under this Chapter may file a complaint within a
period of one year from the date of carrying out of such act.

Chapter -10
Provision concerning partition of common property
208. To be deemed coparcener: For the purpose of apportionment
of common property of undivided family, the husband, wife,
father, mother, son or daughter shall be deemed to be a
coparcener.
209. Equal right in common property: (1) Each coparcener shall
have equal right in common property.
If a woman is pregnant at the time of apportionment
of common property and the child she has conceived is to
become a coparcener, the common property shall be apportioned
considering such a child to be so born a coparcener and setting
aside his/her share of property.
If the pregnant woman under sub-Section (2) does
not deliver a live child, the common property set aside for such
a child shall be apportioned equally to other coparceners.
210. A child born from spouses whose matrimonial relationship is
dissolved to obtain property: A child born to the spouses who
cannot solemnize marriage or whose marriage is not considered
valid or whose matrimonial relationship is dissolved according
to law shall obtain partition of the property from such a parent.
211. To obtain property from a mother: (1) A child whose father
is not traced out shall obtain his/her share of property from the
property of mother only
A wife kept without making public or a child born
from her shall not be entitled to claim a share of property after
death of the husband or father.
212. To obtain partition of property from share of a father or
husband: (1) The child or wife of brothers living in an
undivided family shall obtain partition of property only from the
part of the share of the property of their father or husband as the
case may be.
If the husband or father dies before effecting
partition of the common property, his wife or child, as the case
may be, shall have right over such property he has to obtain.
Where a person is the husband of more than one
wife they shall obtain partition of the common property only
from the part of the property of the husband.
213. Latter wife or offspring to obtain partition of the common
property from part of partition of property of husband or
father: (1) If a person concludes another marriage or a child is
born from the wife so married, after separation by effecting
apportionment of common property among previous wife, child
or at the time when he is living with such previous wife, child so
separated, by mixing his partitioned property with their property,
the wife so married latter or offspring born to such a wife shall
obtain partition of the property only from the part of the
property of such a husband or father.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, if a person whose wife is surviving concludes
another marriage before effecting partition of the common
property, the part of property of other coparcener shall be set
aside and the woman who is so married shall be given partition
of the property from the part of the property he is to obtain.
214. Partition of the common property to be given if maintenance
is deprived: (1) A husband, wife, father, mother, son or
daughter having common property of undivided family shall
have to make, according to his/her reputation and income,
arrangements for maintenance and medical treatment for the
wife, husband, son, daughter, father or mother, as the case may
The parent shall have to make according to their
financial condition, arrangements for proper education of a child.
If a person does not fulfill the obligations under subsections (1) or (2), the concerned coparcener may be entitled to
separate by obtaining partition of the common property.
215. Separation may be effected at anytime: (1) If there exists
mutual agreement among coparceners, they may effect
separation at any time by obtaining share of the common
property.
If the husband, father or head of the family
considers it appropriate for the coparceners to effect separation
by apportionment of common property rather than living in a
single family, the coparceners may effect separation by
apportionment of the common property.
Explanation:
For the purpose of this Code, “head of the family” means a
person having attained the age of majority who carries out works
being the main person of the family or who has the
responsibility to run the household affairs living in the same
joint family engaging in farming, trade, business or any other
work in various places.
216. Husband, wife may effect separation by obtaining share in
common property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section 214, the husband or wife, may effect separation at any
time by obtaining share-in-common property in any of the
following circumstances:-
If the husband or wife expels the wife or husband
from home, or
If the husband or wife causes physical or mental
torture to the wife or husband.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
if the husband concludes another marriage, the wife may effect
separation at any time by taking her share in common property.
(3) If the wife who has effected separation pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (2) concludes another marriage, the property
obtained by her for share in common property shall be retained
by the child, if any, born to her from previous husband; if not,
by the previous husband or his nearest successor.
217. Widow may effect separation by taking share in common
property: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, a widow may effect separation at anytime by
taking her share in common property.
If a widow concludes another marriage, the property
obtained by her shall be retained by the child, if any, born to her
from previous husband, if not, by herself.
218. Renouncement of share in common property: (1) Any
coparcener may execute a deed renouncing his/her share in
common property with or without taking share in part in
common property or taking some cash or kind only for share in
common property.
While executing a deed of renouncement of share in
common property pursuant to sub-Section (1), the renouncement
of share in the property shall be deemed to have been executed
only if consent of the husband, wife or the son or daughter
attaining the age of majority of such coparcener, if any, agrees
to it.
If a deed of renouncement is executed under sunsection (2), it shall be deemed to be equal to obtaining the
partition of common property.
219. Apportionment of share in common property to be effected:
(1) In apportioning shares in common property of an undivided
family, a deed of apportionment of common property shall be
executed among the coparceners, subject to the provisions of
this Chapter.
In effecting apportionment of share in common
property pursuant sub-Section (1), apportionment shall be done
in such a manner that it corresponds to the property and debt of
the undivided family.
Explanation: For the purpose of his Chapter, "debt of
undivided family" means the debt owed as a result of transaction
carried out by a person acting as the head of family or by
transaction carried out with consent of all the coparceners or
by a person who, having attained majority and living in
undivided family carries out household affairs, farming, trade or
any other work in different places or by the transaction carried
out by other persons having obtained age of majority but
approved in writing by the head of the family.
In effecting apportionment of share in common
property, apportionment shall be made by balancing both high
value and less value property with the consent of all coparceners
and, if failing such consent, by a lottery.
If there arises a dispute in any property while
effecting apportionment, apportionment shall be effected only
after settlement of such dispute.
Provided that if it takes a long time to settle such a dispute,
the disputed property shall kept as undivided common property
and other properties shall be apportioned.
While apportioning the shares in common property,
it shall be executed in written form.
220. Matters to be specified in deed of apportionment of
property: The following matters shall be specified in the deed
of apportionment of property:-
Name, surname, age, address of the coparceners and
name of father and grand-father,
Provided that if partition of property of the
married husband or wife is to be made, their names
also shall be specified.
Movable and immovable property to be apportioned
among the coparceners,
If a coparcener owes debt or owns property,
amount of such debt and property.
If, upon apportion of share of property, a coparcener
is to live with another coparcener, the matters
relating thereto;
A declaration made by coparceners that they have
not concealed the property to be apportioned;
If a property is to devolve upon a coparcener only
upon death of the father, mother or husband, wife,
details thereof;
If the share of property or a coparcener is to be
entrusted to a person, matter relating thereto;
Other necessary matters.
221. Deed of apportionment of share of property to be registered:
(1) In effecting apportionment of share of property, a deed of
apportionment of share of property shall be required to be
executed in presence of witnesses and which shall be signed and
thumb-impressed by such witnesses and the coparceners and be
duly registered in the concerned office.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where a separation is effected by apportionment of share of
property in home balancing highly valuable and less valuable
property with or without executing deed of apportionment of
share of property among coparceners before January 10, 1978
and the share of property so received has already been
transmitted in the register of the concerned office or immovable
property of one's own part according to the apportionment is
separately enjoyed or sold or transacted, a deed of division of
share of property shall, even though the deed of apportionment
of share of property is not registered, be deemed to have been
effected.
222. Prohibition
providing
property
without
effecting
apportionment of share of property: (1) A person acting as
head of family having coparcener who has not received share of
property shall have no right to provide property of undivided
family
coparcener
without
effecting
apportionment of share of property.
Provided that:
He/she may provide any property to any coparcener
with the consent of all coparceners,
He/she may provide the property to the extent of
share of property of his/her part, even without the
consent of other coparceners.
In effecting apportionment of share of property pursuant to
this Chapter, the property provided to a coparcener pursuant to
clause (1) of proviso to sub-Section (1) shall be set off for the
share of property he/she is to obtain and other property shall be
apportioned.
223. Statement of claims to be filed by stating inventory of
property: (1) If a coparcener is desirous of effecting separation
by causing his part of share of property to be set aside, he/she
shall have to file a statement of claims specifying therein the
date of separation of bread and board from other coparceners
and disclosing the inventory of the apportionable immovable
property and debt and assets lying in one's own name and, to the
best of his/her knowledge in other coparcener's name.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the
term "date of separation of bread and board" means the
following date:-
where there is a deed of separation of bread
and board, date of execution of such deed,
If, there is no such a deed, the date as agreed
by coparceners for separation of bread and
board,
agreement
reached
between
coparceners pursuant to clause (b), the day
immediately before the day on which the
statement of claim is filed.
If the person filing a statement of claims pursuant to
sub-Section (1) is unable to submit the inventory of property,
he/she shall also have to specify reasons therefor.
If a statement of claims is filed pursuant to sub Section (1), the concerned person shall also have to submit a
statement of defense together with a statement whether the
claimant is to be provided a share of property or not and if
he/she agrees to provide a share of property together with the
inventory of the movable and immovable property registered in
his/her name and the debt and assets.
224. Matters to be stated in inventory: (1) The following matters
shall be stated in the inventory to be submitted pursuant to this
Chapter:-
The place of location of land, plot No., area and
approximate value,
(b) In the case of a house, place of location of the house,
plot no, area, rooms, size, story of house, whether it
is permanently built or mud made and approximate
value thereof,
In the case of movable property, details and
approximate value thereof,
In the case of cash, details thereof, bank balance,
share, debenture, treasury bills, if any,
In the case of livestock, details and approximate
value thereof,
In the case of bullion and jewelries, details and
approximate value,
In the case of vehicle, details thereof and
approximate value,
Details and approximate value of the properties
other than those referred to clauses (a) through (g).
If the value of any property is not stated pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or a dispute has arisen about the value thereof,
the court shall determine the value thereof on the basis in the
case of immovable property, the price fixed by the Land
Revenue Office and in the case of movable property on the basis
of the prevalent market price for the time being.
225. Partition to be made by taking inventory: (1) If it appears
from the statement of claims or statement of defense filed
pursuant to Section 223 that partition requires to be effected,
and where the inventory of property is submitted along with the
statement of claims or statement of defense, the court shall
effect the partition having the coparceners executed a deed to
the effect that the property they have submitted is the only
property to be partitioned and that they have not concealed any
other property.
If the inventory of property is not submitted along
with the statement of claims or statement of defense, the court
shall, by specifying time, ask the coparcener to submit
inventory, and if the coparceners submit inventory within the
time so specified, cause partition to be effected by causing the
coparceners to execute a deed pursuant to sub-Section (1).
226. Partition to be effected on the basis of inventory received:
(1) If the person who is to submit inventory of property within
the time limit as specified in Section 225 fails to submit
inventory or has elapsed time without submitting a statement of
defense, the court shall have to effect partition on the basis of
the inventory submitted by other coparceners.
Where partition is effected pursuant to sub-Section
(1), no statement of claims may be entertained on the ground
that one is dissatisfied on partition.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), if a statement of claims is filed for partition of the property
which was not disclosed by the coparceners in the inventory but
discovered latter on, court shall have to effect partition of such
property.
227. Inventory may be taken by breaking padlock: Where due to
failure of a person to submit an inventory required to be
submitted by him/her, the inventory of property has to be taken
by breaking the padlock of the house custody of which is taken
by him/her, the court may, by opening the padlock in presence
also of the person holding the key of the house, if he/she is
present, if not, in presence of at least two persons including a
representative of the local body and also the person submitting
statement of claims, the coparcener, prepare an inventory of the
property found by maintaining a record thereof.
228. Partition to be effected when inventory is produced: (1) If
the person who has to submit an inventory fails to submit the
inventory or cause the lapse time without submitting statement
of defense and the person submitting statement of claims
requesting for the partition of property also fails to submit the
inventory of property, the court shall, by causing the person
submitting statement of claims to execute a deed of the same
statement, defer the suit subject to the condition that the
partition shall be effected, at the time, when inventory is
produced.
Where a suit is deferred pursuant to sub-Section (1),
if the person submitting statement of claims files a petition
along with inventory, the court shall have to effect partition in
property under the law on the basis of previous record file itself.
229. Not to conceal property: (1) No person shall conceal, suppress
the property that is liable to partition.
If, at the time of partition of property or at the time
when asked by the court the partitionable property lying a
coparcener’s name, is subsequently proved to have been
concealed, the person so concealing the property shall have no
right over such property.
(3) The property concealed under sub-section (2) shall be
partitioned to other coparceners.
230. Property to be reimbursed: If a coparcener is deprived of
using any property partitioned, due to the property being
defective, all coparceners shall have to proportionately
reimburse to him/her property equal to defective property.
231. Property partitioned not to be exchanged: Except by mutual
consent of coparceners, no coparcener shall be entitled to
exchange any property received by him/her as partitioned
property for reason that after partition it is disordered, damaged
or he/she does not prefer it.
232. Partition of pledged or mortgaged property: (1) If a
coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a property
which is liable for partition, the court shall, if all coparceners
agree, effect partition of the property by causing the property to
be released on or the condition that it shall be released on charge
from the property of undivided family.
If all the coparceners do not agree pursuant to sub Section (1), and if the person acting as head of the family or
other persons having attained majority, by securing signature
and thumb-impression also of the person acting as head of the
family, is found to have pledged or mortgaged the property, the
court shall effect partition of that property by causing the
property to be released or on the condition that it shall be
released on charge from the property of undivided family.
Save in the conditions referred to in sub-Section (1)
or (2), if a coparcener is found to have pledged or mortgaged a
property liable to partition in other conditions, the court shall
effect partition of property by causing the property to be
released or on the condition that it shall be released on the
charge from his/her part of the common property.
233. Property or income may be withheld until partition is
effected: If a claimant to a suit of the common property appears
to obtain partition and if he/she files a petition after the
inventory has been submitted to withhold the property or income
thereof to the extent liable to partition to him/her, the court may,
having duly followed the procedures under the law, withhold the
property or income liable to partition to him/her until the
partition is effected.
234. Partition to be so effected as to have the provision of way or
passage: While effecting partition of property if there is no
access to way or passage to a house or land partitioned to a
coparcener and if such a way or passage could be managed from
the land of other coparcener, the partition shall be effected in
such a manner that the concerned coparcener shall provide the
way or passage for access to such house or land.
235. Debtor not to be specified without creditor’s consent: (1)
While effecting partition, a partition shall not be so effected as
to give the responsibility of paying the debt of undivided family
to a sole coparcener, without consent of the creditor.
Even if the responsibility of paying the debt is given
solely to any coparcener, if the creditor does not agree, all
coparceners shall have to pay the debt of the undivided family
equally.
236. Compensation to be paid, if statement of claims is filed by a
person who is not entitled to partition: If a person who is not
entitled to receive a partition in property, files a statement of
claims for receiving partition, the court shall order the person
filing the statement of claims to pay an amount having regard to
the claimed amount where such claimed amount is specified in
the suit filed and where such amount is not specified a
reasonable amount to the defendant, as compensation.
237. Partition share, money or expenditure may be awarded: (1)
If a person who is entitled to obtain partition share, money or
expenditure from a person according to the judgment, files,
having failed to so receive a petition before the court, the court
shall, if the parties are the same, cause the partition money or
expenditure according to the judgment to be awarded as soon as
possible.
If the partition share, expenditure or money is not
provided pursuant to sub-Section (1), for that the person who is
to provide partition, money or expenditure shall be caused to
award a reasonable compensation as well to the petitioner.
238. Limitation: (1) The person aggrieved by an act carried out
under this Chapter may file statement of claims as follows:-
Anytime where partition has never been
effected or a common general deed has been
executed in effecting partition or even though
there is no deed where both the parties have
enjoyed the properties;
Within three months from the date of partition
of property if one is not satisfied with the
partition of property;
In case of concealing or suppression of
property, till the life of the concerned person;
In cases other than those referred to in clauses
(a), (b) and (c), within a period of six months
from the date of commission of such an act.
239. Saving: (1) The partition effected pursuant to the laws for the
time being in force, before commencement of this Code shall be
deemed to have been effected under this Code.
(2) Where a person has taken maintenance for living
(Jiuni) before commencement of this Code, he/she shall be
deemed to have taken partition.

Chapter 11
Provision concerning Testamentary Will
240. Property may be given by Testamentary Will: (1) In case a
person attaining the age of eighteen years and of sound mind
executes a deed unilaterally expressing his/her will of
transferring the property under his/her title, possession and
ownership to the title, possession and ownership of any other
person upon his/her death, he/she shall be deemed to have
executed a testamentary will.
(2) In case one has executed a testamentary will pursuant to
sub-Section (1), the property he/she has willed shall, upon
his/her death, be transferred to the title, possession and
ownership of the person so willed.
(3) While executing a testamentary will pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the person executing the will may give all or any portion of
his/her property or any specific property on any condition or
without any condition as stated in the testamentary will.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no joint testamentary will may be executed through a
single deed by two or more persons.
241. Procedures of Executing Testamentary Will: (1) Whoever
desires to execute a testamentary will pursuant to Section 240
shall prepare two sets of deed stating the details of the property
he/she has desired to will and of he person getting the property
according to the testamentary will and get it signed and sealed in
the presence of any authority certifying testamentary will
pursuant to Section 242.
2) In case the concerned person is present for executing
the deed pursuant to sub-Section (1) along with a deed of
testamentary will, the concerned official to certify the
testamentary will shall, if the deed is found to be duly prepared,
read out the contents of the deed and make the meaning and
consequence of the deed known and if he/she seems to be
desiring to execute the deed on his/her free will and consent,
cause him/her to sign on the deed and certify the deed stating
the same content on the deed.
3) In the deed referred to in sub-Section (1), at least two
persons of full legal capacity shall have to be the witnesses.
4) While executing the testamentary will pursuant to sub Section (1) or (2), the certified place and date of execution of
the testamentary will shall also have to be stated.
5) One copy of the deed certified pursuant to sub-Section
(2) shall have to be retained in the office record and another
copy of the deed shall be given to the person executing the
testamentary will.
(6) The deed not completing the procedures according to
this Section shall not be deemed to have been duly executed and
the title, possession and ownership of the person executing the
testamentary will shall not be transferred through such deed.
242. Authority to certify Testamentary Will: (1) A testamentary
will prepared under this Chapter shall be certified by any of the
following authorities:-
6) Land Revenue Officer at the Land Revenue Office;
7) Staff deputed as a team from the Land Revenue Office;
8) In the event of living outside Nepal, the concerned official
of the Nepali Embassy or Consulate General’s Office in
the foreign country;
9) Notary public.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no title of immovable property may be transferred
through the testamentary will certified by a notary public.
243. Provisions
concerning
sealed
Testamentary
Will:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 241, any one
may execute a testamentary will with the condition that the
name of the recipient of the testamentary will shall be disclosed
only upon his/her death.
2) While executing testamentary will pursuant to sub Section (1), the person executing the testamentary will shall
prepare two copies of the deed and produce them to a Land
Revenue Officer at the Land Revenue Office or to the concerned
official at the Nepali Embassy or Consulate General’s Office if
living in abroad.
3) In case the deed of testamentary will is submitted
pursuant to sub-Section (2), the concerned official shall fulfill
the procedures referred to in Section 242 and certify the deed
and each of the deeds shall be put into separate envelop and seal
them and mark on the outer surface of each of the envelops as
“Sealed Testamentary Will” and the person executing the will
and the official certifying it shall also sign and seal them.
Provided that there is no need of witnesses while
executing sealed testamentary will.
(4) One of the envelops sealed pursuant to sub-Section (3)
shall be retained safely in the office and another copy shall be
given to the person executing the deed.
(5) The person certifying the testamentary will pursuant to
sub-Section (4) shall not, until the sealed testamentary will is
opened upon death of the person executing the testamentary will,
inform anyone about or make public or cause to be disclosed the
person getting the property according to the testamentary will.
(6) In case the envelope retained testamentary will
pursuant to sub-Section (4) is opened or the name of person
getting the property according to the testamentary will is made
known to anyone or disclosed, or the sealed envelope is opened,
the concerned official shall be deemed to have committed abuse
of authority and he/she may be taken actions accordingly.
(7) No envelope of the testamentary will sealed according
to this Section shall be opened until the person executing the
will is surviving.
(8) Once the sealed envelope is received upon death of the
person executing the sealed testamentary will, the person in the
order of priority to entitle to the succession shall open the sealed
testamentary will in presence of at least one official or staff of
the local body and a record of opening of the seal shall have to
be maintained.
(9) In case a sealed testamentary will is opened pursuant
to sub-Section (8), the person to entitle the property according
to the sealed testamentary will shall submit an application to the
concerned Land Revenue Office in order to transfer the title of
the property according to the testamentary will along with a
copy of the testamentary will.
(10) In case the application is filed pursuant to sub Section (9), the concerned Land Revenue Office shall have to
match the copy of the testamentary will with the sealed
testamentary will retained in the office.
Provided that in case the testamentary will has been
executed in an Embassy or Consulate General’s Office, the
office to transfer the title of the property shall have to match the
copy of the testamentary will after getting the sealed
testamentary will from the concerned Embassy or Consulate
General’s Office.
(11) If the sealed testamentary will and the statement of
the applicant is found to be matched while matching the deeds
pursuant to sub-Section (10), the testamentary will shall be
executed and the title shall be transferred.
244. Special Provisions concerning Holographic Will: (1) In case
any person has given any property to any other person writing a
deed of will on his/her own stating the details of the property
he/she has desired to will and signing on it, notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, such a deed of
will shall be deemed to have been duly executed and once the
deed of will becomes effective, the title, possession and
ownership of the property referred to in such a deed of will shall
be transferred to the name of the person getting the property.
Provided that no title, possession and ownership of immovable
property may be transferred through such a deed of will.
(2) The deed of will referred to in sub-Section (1) may be
executed with or without a seal.
245. Procedures to be fulfilled if the person executing will is
blind: (1) In case the person executing the deed of will is a
blind, the official certifying the deed shall have to read out the
content of the deed once and the person to witness the deed shall
also have to read out the deed to the blind person and meaning
and consequences of the deed shall also have to be made known
to him/her, before causing such a person to sign on the deed.
(2) If the person executing the deed expresses that he/she
has executed the deed on his/her free will and consent while
reading out the deed to him/her pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
deed shall have to be certified stating the same.
246. Procedures to be fulfilled if the person executing will is
hearing impaired: (1) In case the person executing the deed of
will is hearing impaired and he/she could not understand the
meaning and consequences of the deed while it is read out by the
official certifying the deed, the deed shall be given to him/her to
read and the meaning and consequences of the deed shall be
made known to him/her by noting it down in a separate sheet of
paper.
(2) In case the meaning and consequences of the deed
shall not be made known to him/her pursuant to sub-Section (1)
or in case the person executing the deed is illiterate or unable to
read, the deed shall be certified by making known to him/her the
meaning and consequences of the deed by way of symbol and
also by making the meaning and consequences of the deed
known to his/her spouse or son or daughter living in the
undivided family, and in case he/she does not have such relative
or even such relative is also hearing impaired, to the two
persons chosen by the person executing the deed of will.
247. Person ineligible to become witness: In a will to be executed
under this Chapter, the following person shall not be eligible to
be a witness:-
a) One who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
b) One who has no sound mind;
c) The official to certify the deed for which a witness is
required;
d) If the deed has been certified by a notary public, his/her
spouse of the undivided family or a relative within
his/her three generations or his/her staff;
e) The person who is receiving property under the deed or
his/her successor.
248. Pre-Conditions to be fulfilled: (1) In case a pre-condition has
to be fulfilled by the person receiving the property in order to
acquire the property according to a will executed under this
Chapter, the deed of will shall not be effective unless he/she
fulfills such a pre-condition.
(2) In case the deed of will could not be effective pursuant
to sub-Section (1), the property under the will shall be according
to the law of succession upon the death of the person executing
such deed.
249. Deed of will to be cancelled: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a testamentary will shall,
ipso facto, be revoked in the following circumstances:-
In case the person to receive a property according to
a deed of will dies before the person executing the
deed of will.
In case the person receiving the property under the
will commits or causes to commit a homicide against
the person executing the will with the motive to
receive the property under such a will.
250. Deed of Will may be amended or revoked: (1) The person
executing a deed of will executed under this Chapter may at any
time revoke it or alter its terms or conditions.
(2) Where any person has executed a deed of will under
this Chapter, he/she may get such deed revoked executing a
separate deed being present before the official who has certified
the deed of will.
(3) While getting the deed of will revoked pursuant to sub Section (2), the procedures referred to in Section 241 shall have
to be followed.
(4) The property once willed shall not be given to another
person without a deed of will and without getting the earlier
deed of will revoked under this Chapter.
(5) If a property has been given to another person without
getting the earlier deed of will revoked pursuant to sub-Section
(4), the deed of will executed earlier shall be valid.
251. Person willed may deny: (1) Where any person has executed a
deed of will under this Chapter, the person getting the property
according to the deed may deny to accept the property at any
time.
(2) In case the person getting the property denies
accepting pursuant to sub-Section (1), the deed shall be ipso
facto be revoked.
(3) In case the person getting the property denies
accepting the property pursuant to sub-Section (1) after the
death of the person executing the deed of will, such property
shall be divested according to the law of succession prevailing
at the time of death of the person executing the deed of will.
252. Certain Property to be segregated: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, any person shall, while
executing a deed of will, have to segregate one fourth of his/her
property for the following people dependent on him/her:-
a) For livelihood of a spouse having no property or
source of income or employment;
b) For livelihood of incapacitated son or daughter
having no property or source of income or
employment;
c) For livelihood and education of the minor son or
daughter having not attained the age of twenty one
years until he/she attains the age of twenty one years.
253. Transfer of title: (1) In case anyone has executed a deed of will
under this Chapter, the title, possession and ownership of the
property so willed shall be transferred to the name of the person
so willed subject to provisions of this Chapter upon the death of
the person executing the will.
(2) In case the title, possession and ownership of the
property is transferred pursuant to sub-Section (1), if such
property has to be transferred, the office or officer to transfer
the property shall have to transfer the title, possession and
ownership of the property according to the deed of will.
(3) While transferring the property pursuant to sub-Section
(2), the person getting the property shall have to pay the fee
equal to the fee that is applicable in the case of deed of will with
immediate effect.
254. Provisions concerning Partition of Property and Common
Property to be ineffective: (1) After the commencement of this
Chapter, the provisions relating to partition of property and
common property shall ipso facto be ineffective.
(2) After this Chapter commences, the provisions relating
to partition of property or a lump sum amount in lieu thereof or
an annual amount or partial amount or alimony while divorcing
the relationship between husband and wife through the consent
of husband and wife or because of the husband shall be ipso
facto inactivated.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
in the cases where the relationship between husband and wife is
divorced through the consent of husband and wife or because of
the husband, if the wife so demands, the court shall have to
cause the husband to pay the wife appropriate amount having
regard to the following matters:-
(a) The income and property of the husband;
(b) Number of the children
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (3),
in case the income and property of the wife demanding for a
share of property or an amount in lieu thereof or expenses is
more than the property and income of the husband, no amount
shall be required to be paid by the husband to the wife.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in cases where a case for divorce of the relationship of
husband
already
filed
before
commencement of this Chapter, partition of property between
the husband and wife may be effected or an amount or expense
may cause to be paid according to the then prevailing law.
255. Limitation: A person aggrieved by an act carried out under this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date of having knowledge of carrying out of such an act.

Chapter 11
Provision concerning Succession
256. Succession deemed to be opened: Upon death of a person,
his/her succession shall be deemed to be opened.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter "succession"
means an act to transfer liabilities and rights of the deceased in
regard to debt, wealth or property to a successor in accordance
with law.
257. Succession to devolve upon a successor: Where a person's
succession is opened, such a succession shall devolve upon
his/her nearest successor.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "a
successor" means a person who stands in the priority order of
succession under Section 3.
258. Priority order of the successors upon whom succession shall
devolve: (1) The priority order of the nearest successor upon
whom succession shall devolve shall, subject to other Section of
this Chapter, be as follows:-
Husband or wife of undivided family;
Son, daughter, widow daughter-in-law;
Father,
mother,
mother,
grandson
granddaughter towards the son of undivided family;
Separated husband, wife, father, mother, stepmother;
Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from the son’s
generation;
Separated grand-father, grand-mother;
Uncle, aunty, nephew, niece of undivided family
Separated grand-son, grand-daughter from son's
generation,
Wife of elder brother, wife of younger brother, of
undivided family,
Separated elder or younger brothers and sisters;
Other nearest successor within seven generation of
male clan.
So long as the person in the upper order of priority
referred to sub-Section (1) is surviving, the person in the
subsequent order of priority shall not be entitled to succession.
(3) Where more than one person are standing in one and
same priority order under sub-Section (1), all persons shall be
entitled to equal succession.
If any successor of the priority order upon whom
succession devolves pursuant to sub-Section (3) denies to accept
succession, the succession shall devolve upon the successors of
the same order and if such a successor too denies to accept it,
succession shall be devolved to the successor of next in order.
259. Succession
devolve
distant
successor:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 258, if the
succession of a person who was living, by taking his/her share
of family property, with a distant relative in spite of having
close relatives, is opened upon his/her death, the succession of
such a person shall devolve upon the successor with whom the
deceased was residing.
Where the deceased was maintained by a distant
successor, instead of close one, such deceased's succession shall
devolve upon the person so maintaining.
260. Succession to devolve to a caretaker: In case a closer
successor has not cared and a distant successor has taken care of
a person at the life time of such person, the succession of the
person so taken care shall devolve upon the distant successor so
caring.
261. Succession to devolve upon separated successor: (1) If the
succession of a person who was residing, by taking share of
family property, with a successor who is separated, failing
maintenance by his/her successor of undivided family, is opened
upon his/her death, the deceased's succession shall devolve upon
such a separated successor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section
(1), where the succession of a person who was residing, without
having obtained share of property, with any successor only for
some days, is opened upon his/her death, the deceased's
succession shall devolve upon the successor with the whom
deceased was so living later.
262. Succession
devolve
person
maintaining:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
where the deceased was maintained by a person other than the
successor, such succession shall devolve upon the person who
had maintained the deceased.
263. Not to be obliged to accept succession: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, no person shall be
obliged to accept a succession.
A person who declines to accept a succession shall
have to provide information in writing to the court thereof
within three years of devolution of succession.
If a person does not accept succession within the
period under sub-Section (2), such succession shall be deemed
to be devolved upon another successor.
Even if a person does not accept a succession
pursuant to sub-Section (1), he/she shall have to conduct
obsequies rites of the deceased in accordance with tradition.
264. No right to succession: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if a person commits or causes to be
committed homicide against person by anger, avenge or with
malafide intention of receiving succession, the offspring of the
person so committing or causing to be committed shall not be
entitled to receive succession of the deceased.
265. Obligations and rights of a person upon whom succession is
devolved: (1) The obligations and rights of the person upon
whom succession is devolved shall be as follows:-
to perform or cause to be performed obsequies rites
or funeral procession of the deceased according to
his/her tradition,
to pay deceased's debt due to the creditor, and
to have right over the deceased's borrower and
property.
Where the obsequies rites or funeral procession of a
deceased was performed by a person other than the person who
is entitled to the succession of the deceased, the person entitled
to such succession shall have to provide the cost incurred for
performing obsequies rites or funeral procession of the deceased
and additional twenty five percent amount of such cost to the
person who has performed such obsequies rites or funeral
procession.
Provided that if any person has caused to perform the
obsequies rites or funeral procession of the deceased by others,
he/she shall be liable to pay merely the exact expense incurred
in such obsequies rites or funeral acts.
266. Creditor may recover debt: Where a person whose succession
is opened has creditors, such creditors may recover his/her debt
from the person upon whom succession has devolved.
Provided that a successor shall not be obliged to pay the
debt in excess of the deceased's property succeeded by him/her.
267. Local body to receive succession property: (1) Where the
succession of a person is opened and his or successor declines to
accept such succession, the deceased's property remaining after
deducting the cost incurred for his/her funereal act rites and
obsequies acts and after payment of debt due to his/her creditors
shall be devolved to the local body.
Where a person dies in a place and has no successor
but has but property in that place, the person who performs
his/her funereal act rite or maintains his/her books and accounts
shall have to promptly give notice thereof to the local body.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-Section (2),
the local body shall prepare an inventory of the property and
goods of the deceased in the presence of two local gentlemen
and forward notice thereof including a public inquiry deed
thereof to the concerned District Administration Office.
If a public inquiry deed together with the inventory
of wealth and goods is received pursuant to sub-Section (3) and
address of the deceased is traced out, the District Administration
Office shall transmit a notice according to law to the successors
of the deceased to receive deceased's property within a period of
three months.
If the successor of the deceased does not appear
within the period specified pursuant to sub-Section (4) or the
successor of such a deceased is not traced out, the District
Administration Office shall publish a notice on a newspaper of
national level inviting his/her successor, if any, to make a claim
over the deceased's property.
If the successor of the deceased appears within the
period of time under sub-Section (5) or (6), the property
remained after deducting cost incurred for funereal act of the
deceased, which shall be given to the concerned person, and
after recovering ten percent of such property, to the concerned
successor.
If no successor of the deceased appears within the
time period specified in sub-Section (5) or his/her address is not
traced out, the property remained after giving the cost incurred
for funereal act to the concerned person, shall be received by the
local body.
The property received by the local body pursuant to
sub-Section (1) or (7) shall be required to be deposited by the
concerned successor or the District Administration Office to the
fund of the local body.
The property received by a local body pursuant to
this Section shall have to use by such body for public interest.
268. Property of a foreigner died in Nepal: (1) In case a foreigner
dies in Nepal and he/she has no successor at that place and there
is his/her property, the person performing his/her funeral rites
and or maintaining his/her accounts shall immediately inform
about the matter to the local body.
(b) In case the information referred to in sub-Section (1) is
received, the local body shall prepare a statement of the property
of the deceased in presence of at least two local gentlepersons
and furnish one copy of the statement to the concerned District
Administration Office along with a public deed of inquiry
executed to that effect.
(3) In case a deed of public inquiry along with the statement of
property is received pursuant to sub-Section (2), the District
Administration shall immediately inform about it to the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the Ministry shall have to send notice to
the concerned country of the deceased according to law to
receive the property of the deceased within three months.
(4) In case any successor of the deceased is present within the
time limit referred to in sub-Section (3), the expenses incurred
for funeral rites of the deceased shall be deducted and given to
the concerned person and a fee of 10% shall be charged on the
property and the remaining property shall be handed over to the
successor of the deceased.
(5) In case no successor of the deceased is present within the
time limit referred to in sub-Section (3), the expenses incurred
for funeral rites of the deceased shall be deducted and given to
the concerned person and the remaining property shall devolve
on the local body.
(6) The property acquired by the local body pursuant to sub Section (5) shall be recorded in a fund of the local body.
(6) The local body shall use the property acquired by it pursuant
to sub-Section (5) for public interest.
269. Limitation: In case where separate statutory limitation to file a
complaint is provided for in this Chapter, it shall be accordingly
and in other cases, a person aggrieved by an act carried out
under this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of two
years from the date on which the succession is opened.

Part 4
LAW CONCERNING
PROPERTY

Chapter-1
General Provisions Concerning Property
270. Deemed to be property: Any cash, goods or action shall be deemed
to be a property if such cash, goods or action can be used or transacted
in or the title thereto can be transferred by way of purchase, sale or
otherwise or any benefit can be derived therefrom.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Code, "goods" means
any movable or immovable property.
271. Property deemed to be in either movable or immovable form: A
property shall be deemed to be in either movable or immovable form
irrespective of its material or non-material, tangible or intangible form.
272. Property deemed to be immovable: (1) The following property shall
be deemed to be an immovable property:
Building or land or structure fixed thereto,
Any goods attached to a building or land permanently,
Mines, stones or minerals embedded in land,
Natural water, surface water and underground water,
Building or other structure made permanently in such a manner that it
can float over a river, lake or pond,
A standing tree, plant or fruit tree or fruits or flowers growing on
such a tree, plant or fruit tree, crops in land, or
Any movable property attached to an immovable property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
any structure, goods or any part thereof, fixed or attached to any
immovable property gets or is detached or unfixed, the structure,
goods or part so detached or unfixed shall be deemed to be a movable
property.
273. Property deemed to be movable: The following property shall be
deemed to be a movable property:
Goods that can be moved from one place to another,
Bond, security, promissory note, bill of exchange, letter of
credit or other negotiable instrument or benefits thereform,
Intellectual property,
Right in security,
Trade good-will or franchise,
Property other than the immovable property.
274. Classification of property according to ownership: The property
shall be classified as follows according to the ownership and the form
of use thereof:
Private property,
Property in common,
Joint property,
Community property,
Public property,
Government property,
Trust property.
275. Property deemed to be private property: (1) Any of the following
properties owned by any person or properties accrued therefrom shall
be deemed to be the private property of that person:
Property earned by way of his/her knowledge, skills or
effort,
Property acquired by way of donation, bequeath, will or
inheritance,
Property acquired by way of a lottery or gift,
Property acquired by way of remuneration, gratuity,
pension, treatment allowance, provident fund, insurance
or other social security,
Property acquired by way of intellectual property or
royalty,
Property acquired in any manner whatsoever while living
apart upon separation of board and bread in accordance
with law or while managing own accommodation at own
cost despite not so living apart,
Property earned or acquired by a woman prior to
marriage or acquired from her parental side at the time of
marriage or accrued therefrom, or
Property which, according to law, is considered to be the
exclusive private property of a person.
Any person shall be entitled to exclusively deal with
his/her private property, subject to this Code.
276. Property deemed to be property in common: (1) Any of the
following properties being owned by any co-owner, out of the coowners, subject to Section 275 or property accrued therefrom shall be
deemed to be the property in common:
Property inherited from ancestors,
Property owned by the co-owners,
Property earned by the co-owners from the farming,
industry, trade or business in common or property
accrued therefrom.
Except where separated in accordance with law, any
property earned by the spouses or property accrued therefrom shall
also be deemed to be the property in common of the spouses.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of subsection (1), any property earned by parents for the purpose of partition
between the parents and their children shall also be considered to be
the property in common.
The use of, and transfer of right in, and other provisions
on, the property in common shall be as set forth in the other Chapters
of this Code.
277. Property deemed to be joint property: (1) Any property owned by
two or more persons except members in of the undivided family or
property accrued therefrom shall be deemed to be a joint property.
The entitlement to and share of a joint holder in the joint
property shall be as set forth in a deed setting out such entitlement and
share, and failing such a deed, the joint holders of that property shall
be deemed to have equal entitlement and share.
The use and management of, transfer of title to, and other
provisions of, the joint property shall be governed by this Chapter and
the other Chapters of this Code.
278. Prohibition on alteration in joint property without consent: Any
alteration in a joint property or any change in its form may not be
made without consent of all the owners of the joint property.
279. Trees, plants on boundary to be deemed common: Unless
otherwise proved, trees or plants lying on the boundary of two owners
of adjoining lands shall be deemed to be their common property.
280. Management, protection and maintenance of joint property: (1)
The management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
shall be made as per the consent of the owners of that property.
Failing consent between the owners in relation to the
management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (1), the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property shall be made according to the
decision of majority members.
Failing a majority opinion between the owners in relation
to the management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (2), the owner who has the largest entitlement
or share in that property shall make its management, protection and
maintenance.
Expenses incurred in the management, protection and
maintenance of the joint property, if any, made by any owner pursuant
to sub-section (2) or (3) shall be borne by all owners in proportion to
their respective entitlement or share.
The owner failing to manage, protect and maintain the
joint property in accordance with sub-section (4) shall pay the expense
incurred in the management, protection and maintenance of that
property to the person making management, protection and
maintenance thereof no later than one year.
Where any owner fails to pay the expenses incurred in
the management, protection and maintenance of the joint property
within the period referred to in sub-section (5), the person making
management, protection and maintenance thereof shall be entitled to
purchase the entitlement and share of that owner in that property at the
prevailing price.
Provided that the person so purchasing the joint property may
deduct the expenses of management and maintenance of his/her
portion.
281. Legal action or defense by owner of joint property: (1) In the event
of a need to institute a legal action against any person or defend a case
in relation to the protection of the joint property, all owners have to
make such institution or defense.
Where all owners are not available as referred to in subsection (1), any or some of the owners may, on behalf of him/her or
the other owners, institute a legal action against any person or defend
a case.
282. Separation of share from joint property: (1) Any owner of the joint
property may separate his/her entitlement or share therein from the
other owners at any time.
The separation of the joint property as referred to in subsection (1) has to be effected in accordance with the consent of all
owners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), where the separation of any joint property results either in a
significant loss to the other owners or in the form of that property,
such separation thereof may not be made.
Where any joint property cannot be separated in the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (3), the owners of that
property shall sell such property and divide the proceeds of sale
between them in proportion to their respective entitlement and share
therein.
Where any joint property cannot be sold in accordance
with sub-section (4) or all owners do not agree to sell it and any owner
intends to buy such property, such owner may exclusively own it by
paying the price of that property to the other owners in the same
proportion.
Where two or more owners intend to buy the joint
property pursuant to sub-section (5), the owner who agrees to pay the
highest price shall be entitled to purchase such property.
283. Provisions Concerning community, public, government and trust
properties: The provisions of community, public, government and
trust properties, the ownership, use, management thereof, and transfer
of right therein, and other provisions shall be as set forth in the other
Chapters of this Code.
284. Limitation: A person aggrieved from any act done or action taken
under this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months
from the date on which such an act or action is done or taken.

Chapter-2
Provisions Concerning Ownership and Possession
285. Ownership to be deemed: Where any person acquires the right in
any property in accordance with law, his/her ownership in that
property shall be deemed.
286. Right of an owner: Subject to laws, a person, in capacity of the
owner of any property, shall have the following right in that property:
To use the property,
To sell or otherwise transfer the title to the property,
To mortgage or pledge the property in any manner,
To deal in the property,
To take the profits of the property in any manner whatsoever,
To make any kind of physical construction, wall or fence or
delimit boundary, in his/her land, or change the form of any
property or otherwise protect it,
To use his/her land or part below its surface or goods therein or
sky above its surface, or
To institute legal action in any manner in relation to the
acquisition or security of the property.
287. Possessory right to be deemed: Where a person holds any property
with him/her with intention to possess the property in accordance with
law, he/she shall be deemed to have possessory right over the property.
288. Acquisition of possessory right: (1) A person may acquire the
possessory right over any property in the following circumstance:
In the capacity of the owner thereof,
Acquiring the property owned by another person in
accordance with law,
Obtaining consent of the possessor of such property.
Only the possessory right acquired peaceably, openly or
in bona fide shall be deemed to have been acquired lawfully.
289. Person competent to acquire possessory right: (1) A person may
acquire the possessory right either in person or through his/her agent.
A person who is incompetent and semi-competent may
acquire the possessory right through his/her guardian.
290. Rights of possessor: (1) Any person, in capacity of the possessor,
shall be entitled to the following rights, subject to the laws:
To uninterruptedly possess the property in his/her
possession, subject to the laws in force, or the contract, if
any, entered into in relation to that property,
To use any benefits of the property in his/her possession.
In the event of acquisition by a person of the possessory
right in bona fide over any goods owned by any one else, the person
shall be entitled to reimbursement from the other person who has the
possessory right over the property for necessary expenses incurred in
the management, maintenance or care of such goods.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the former possessor shall be entitled to retain such property with
him/her unless and until the expenses referred to in that sub-section
are reimbursed.
Where a bona fide possessor of any property not in
his/her ownership has attached any goods to such a property, the
possessor shall be entitled to detach or take out the goods attached by
him/her from the property without tempering with such a property.
291. Circumstances where possessory right is lost: The possessory right
of a person over any property shall be deemed as lost in any of the
following circumstances:
If the person abandons the property,
If the person transfer the property, or
If the property is totally destroyed or become useless.
292. Adverse possessory right to be deemed: (1) Notwithstanding any
thing contained elsewhere in this Chapter, where any person has
possessed any property or land owned by any one else since more than
three years ago in the case of movable property and thirty years ago in
the case of land as if the property or land were owned by him/her, that
person shall be deemed to have adverse possessory right over such a
property or land.
Provided that:
No adverse possessory right may be acquired over a
government, public, community or trust land despite the
length of the period of possession.
Where a contract or other law provides for separate
provisions in relation to any property or land, such
provisions shall be applicable to such a property or land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where possession is acquired forcefully or by doing any action
secretly or without knowledge of the possessor of any property or land,
this Section shall not be applicable.
293. Compensation for damage: (1) Where any person has acquired the
possessory right over any property forcefully, with malafide intention
or secretly, the person shall return the benefits derived from that
possessory right and such property to the concerned person and pay
compensation for the benefits which he/she has already used or for
any loss caused to the property due to his/her negligence in the course
of using the property.
Where any property owned by any one else is lost or
damaged during the continuance of the possessory right of a person
over the property, the person shall pay compensation for such a
property to the concerned person.
Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done or action
taken pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of
three months from the date of knowledge of such an act or action.

Chapter-3
Provisions Concerning Uses of Property
295. Prohibition on use or acquisition of other's property: (1) No
person may use other's property without consent of that other person.
No person may acquire other's property without consent
of that other person.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in accordance
with law, acquire any property owned by a person for public interest.
No person may temper with other's property by closing
the road or exit of the other person or doing any work or construction
on the border of his/her land or otherwise.
No person may enter other's house and compound
without consent of that other person except in accordance with law.
296. Property to be inviolable: (1) No person may encroach or trespass
other's property by way of overlapping, pressing or otherwise.
Where any person takes possession of other's property by
way of any act referred to in sub-section (1), that person shall be
deemed to have encroached or trespassed such a property.
297. Security measures to be adopted: A person shall, while doing any
work on his/her house or land, adopt security measures in order to
avoid any loss or damage or effect to the neighbor's house or land in
any manner.
Provided that matters such as gas, smell, smoke or noise
emitted or produced from the use by any neighbor of his/her house or
land, except where a business transaction is carried on by the neighbor,
shall not be deemed to cause a loss or damage or effect to a house or
land.
298. Prohibition on building house in other's land without consent: (1)
No person shall build a house in a land without obtaining a written
consent of the owner of the land.
If any person builds a house in the land without obtaining
a written consent of the owner of the land, the landowner may, if
he/she so desires, purchase of the house on payment of the price that
is less by twenty five percent of the market value of that house.
If the landowner does not purchase such a house pursuant
to sub-section (2), the house owner may, if the owner so consents,
purchase the land on payment of the price that is higher by twenty five
percent of the land where the house is located.
If both parties do not agree to purchase and sell the house
or land pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the person who has built the
house shall demolish the house and take away his/her materials within
six months of the date on which the house is so built.
If the house is not demolished within the period referred
to in sub-section (4), it shall belong to the landowner.
299. To maintain distance while putting windows: If a person or
government body has to build a house by putting a window towards
the neighbor's land, the person or body shall have to maintain a
distance by leaving at least five feet land.
300. Prohibition on channeling water of house or roof: No person shall
channel the water of his/her house or roof to other's house or land or a
public road.
301. Prohibition on making safety tank adjoining to neighbor's land:
(1) No person shall make a safety tank by adjoining it to the
neighbor's land.
If a person has to make a safety tank in his/her land,
he/she shall have to leave at least three feet land towards the
neighbor's land except with the neighbor's consent.
302. To leave land while digging a well: In digging a well in one's land,
one shall have to leave the land so that the distance of at least three
feet can be maintained.
303. Prohibition on planting trees or plants causing effect: (1) No
person shall plant trees or plants in such a way so that it causes
effects to other's house, land or property.
If the trees or plants planted by a person in his/her land
cause any effect to other's house, land or property, the person who has
planted such trees or plants shall cut the branches or roots of the trees
or plants in such a manner as not to cause loss or damage to that other
person's house, land or property.
If a person who has planted such trees or plants fails to
cut the branches or roots of the trees or plants pursuant to sub-section
(2), the person who is affected therefrom may cut the branches or
roots of such trees or plants on his/her own.
The person who has planted trees or plants shall bear the
amount for the loss or damage, if any, caused to other's land, house or
property while cutting the branches or roots of trees or plants pursuant
to sub-section (2) or (3), the expenses incurred by the affected person
in cutting the branches or roots of trees or plants or amount for the
property damaged therefrom on the failure of the person who has
planted such trees or plants to cut the branches or roots thereof.
304. Right to compensation: If any loss or damage is caused to any
person from any act done or action taken by any person in accordance
with this Chapter, the loss or damage sustaining person shall be
entitled to recover a reasonable compensation from the doer such act.
305. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done or action
taken in accordance with this Chapter may file a complaint within a
period of six months from the date of knowledge of such act or action.

Chapter-4
Provisions Concerning Cultivation, Use and Registration of Land
306. Prohibition on use of other's land: No person shall cultivate or use,
or cause to be cultivated or used, any land in which another person has
the title, possession and ownership without consent of that other
person.
307. Requirement to allow land to be used for ditch: (1) If a person who
needs to make a ditch through other's land to cultivate his/her land
makes a request for land, the owner of concerned land shall have to
provide the land to make the ditch through the place where the owner
considers appropriate.
In consideration for the land provided for making a ditch
through it pursuant to sub-section (1), the person making the ditch
shall provide a substitute land, amount according to the prevailing
price of the land used in the making of ditch or reasonable
compensation to the owner of land concerned.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
a ditch is made in a public or government land, it is not required to
provide a substitute land, price of land or compensation for the land
used in the making of ditch.
308. Prohibition on using whole water of river or stream: No owner of
a land shall so use the whole water of the river or stream which
originates or flows from the land as to prevent the owner of
downstream land from using the same or as to endanger the life of
aquatic animals in the river or stream or as to adversely affect the
ecological balance.
309. Prohibition on making ditch affecting irrigated field: No person
shall make a new ditch above a land irrigated by a ditch already made
and in operation in a manner to significantly lessen the volume of
water in that land.
310. Use and allocation of ditch water: (1) A person who spends labor or
money in the making of a ditch shall have the first priority to the ditch
water for the cultivation of land.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
a place where people have been using the water according to agreed
division between them from the time immemorial, all people shall be
entitled to use the ditch water according to the division.
If the water is sufficient for or is no longer required for a
person who uses the water pursuant to sub-section (1), another person
shall be entitled to use the ditch water for cultivating the land
irrespective of the person whom the ditch belongs to.
The water flows over the land of a person to the land of
another, such water may be used even without the consent of the
concerned land-owner, and no claim shall lie for the same.
311. Prohibition on alteration in ditch without consent: If any ditch is
made only in the land of a person and other persons have also been
using the ditch, the owner of land where such a ditch is situated shall
not be allowed to alter the ditch without consent of the other persons.
312. Prohibition on use of water by one who does not make labor or
expenses in making ditch: (1) While making a new ditch or
repairing an old ditch, all persons who use the water of such ditch
have to make necessary labor or expenses in proportion to their
respective land.
A person who does not make labor or expenses in
making a new ditch or repairing an old ditch pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall not be entitled to use the water of such ditch.
313. Making ditch or using of water with mutual consent:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if
there is a separate agreement between the concerned landowners or
those who make a ditch or users of water in relation to the making of
ditch or using of water for the cultivation of land, the ditch may be
made or water used according to the agreement.
314. Cultivation of land adjacent to river bank: If a river or stream
enters in a land and divides it or cuts a land, the land shall belong to
its owner and may be cultivated by the owner after the river or stream
changes its course and leaves the land.
315. Prohibition on registration: No person shall register in his/her name
any land that belongs to other person.
316. Transfer and transmission to be made: (1) If a person needs to have
transfer of a land on the death of its registration holder or to have
transmission of a land in which the person has got right in any manner,
the concerned person has to make an application to the Land Revenue
Office and obtain transfer and transmission within thirty five days of
the occurrence of such event.
If a person makes an application for transfer and
transmission after the expiry of the time limit referred to in subsection (1), the Land Revenue Office shall execute the transfer and
transmission of such land in the applicant's name by collecting the fee
of one hundred rupees irrespective of the length of post-expiry period.
317. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any activity done
pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six
months from the date of knowledge of the commission of such an act.

Chapter-5
Provisions Concerning Government, Public and Community Properties
318. Property to be deemed as government property: The following
property title to which belongs to, or which is owned, controlled by,
or subject to, the Government of Nepal shall be deemed to be the
government property:
Government houses, buildings or lands,
Roads, paths or railways,
Forests, or trees and bushes in forests,
Rivers, elevated parts of rivers, streams, rivulets, lakes, ponds
and banks thereof,
Canals, ditches or uncultivated, barren lands,
Terrains, mountains, rocks, sandy lands, gardens, or
Property other than the public, community, trust or any one's
private property.
319. Property to be deemed as public property: (1) The following
property which is for public purpose shall be deemed to be the public
property:
Houses, lands, sewerage or roads having been used since
ancient times,
Wells, water conduits, shores, wells, ponds and banks
thereof,
Exits for chattels, pasture lands, graveyards and lands
where these are located,
Inns, rest houses, monuments, religious meditation sites,
memorials, temples, shrines, Chaitya, monasteries,
Stupas, churches, courtyards, open parts of markets,
platforms or lands where these are located,
Lands where fairs, markets and public entertainment or
sports sites are located, or
Such other property as prescribed to be the public
property by the Government of Nepal, upon a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
The ownership of the public property shall vest in a
public organization or the Government of Nepal.
320. Property deemed to be community property: Any land held by a
community for its use, any structure built in such land or other
property owned and possessed by it shall be deemed to be the
community property.
321. Details to be updated: (1) The Land Revenue Office shall prepare
and update the following details in relation to the government and
public properties situated within the district:
The location where the government or public properties
are situated, plot number and area, in the case of a land,
and situation of the house, if any,
If the government or public properties are possessed by,
or subjected to, any body or organization, details thereof,
Other necessary details.
The Local Body shall render necessary assistance to the
Land Revenue Office in preparing the details as referred to in subsection (1).
After the preparation of the details pursuant to subsection (1), the Land Revenue Office shall forward a copy thereof
each to the District Administration Office and the concerned Local
Body.
The Local Body shall prepare and update the details as
referred to in sub-section (1) in relation to the community properties
situated within its jurisdiction.
322. Land ownership registration certificate to be provided: (1) If any
government land is held in the name of a government body or public
organization, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such a
body or organization and provide it to such a body or organization.
If any land is held in the name of a community in
accordance with laws, the Land Revenue Office shall prepare the land
ownership registration certificate of such land in the name of such
community and provide it to that community.
323. Obligation to protect government, public or community
properties: (1) The Government of Nepal, public organization or
community holding the right in, possession of, and control over, the
government, public or community properties shall itself protect such
properties.
The District Administration Office and the concerned
Local Body shall be responsible for the protection of government and
public properties.
The concerned community and Local Body shall be
responsible for the protection of the community property.
324. Prohibition on registration of government, public or community
properties in individual's name: (1) No person shall register, or
cause to be registered, any government, public or community property
in his/her name.
If a person registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in his/her name, such
registration shall, ipso facto, be void.
If a complaint is filed as to the registration of any
government, public or community property in any person's name, the
Land Revenue Office shall also summon the presence of the
registration-holder and inquire into the manner and make necessary
decision within six months after the date of filing the complaint.
If the registration of any government, public or
community property in any person's name is revoked pursuant to this
Section, the Land Revenue Officer shall make necessary entries in the
records maintained in his/her Office and give information thereof to
the District Administration Office and the concerned Local Body.
A person who registers, or causes to be registered, any
government, public or community property in contravention of this
Section shall be liable to the punishment by the Land Revenue Office
with a fine of ten thousand rupees to fifty thousand rupees.
325. Prohibition on possession or cultivation of government, public
and community land: (1) No person shall, except with the approval
of the Government of Nepal, concerned public organization or
community, cultivate, or cause to be cultivated, any government,
public or community land.
No person shall possess any government, public or
community land by way of overlapping, encroachment, surrounding
or otherwise.
If any person possesses or cultivates any government,
public or community land in contravention of sub-section (1) or (2),
the concerned Land Revenue Office, in the case of the government or
public land, and the concerned Local Body, in the case of the
community land, shall separate such land, recover the crops yielded in
the land from that person and let it uncultivated.
The Land Revenue Office or concerned Local Body, as
the case may be, shall punish any person, who possesses or cultivates
any government, public or community land in contravention of this
Section, with a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
326. Prohibition on making construction in government, public or
community land: (1) No person shall build any structure in any
government, public or community land, for personal or public
purposes.
Provided that such structure may be made as considered
appropriate by the Government of Nepal, in the case of a government
or public land, and by the concerned community, in the case of a
community land.
If any person proceeds to make any structure in any
government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Body shall
have to stop such work immediately.
If any person has already made any structure in any
government, public or community land in contravention of subsection (1), the concerned Chief District Officer or Local Body shall
have to give a time limit of fifteen days to the main person having
made the structure to demolish such structure.
The person having made such structure shall have to
demolish the structure at his/her own expense within the time limit
given pursuant to sub-section (3).
If the main person having made such structure fails to
demolish the structure within the time limit given pursuant to subsection (3), the concerned Chief District Officer shall have to
demolish such structure.
If the Chief District Officer demolishes any structure
pursuant to sub-section (5), the Chief District Officer shall recover the
expenses incurred in such demolition from the person and punish the
main person having made the structure with a fine not exceeding
twenty five thousand rupees.
It shall be the duty of the concerned Police Office to
render necessary assistance, if any, sought by the Local Body in
stopping the making of any structure or in demolishing any already
made structure pursuant to this Section.
327. Power to transfer government property: The Government of Nepal
may transfer any government property which is owned and possessed
by, or subjected to, some body or organization to any other body or
organization, with the approval of such owning body or organization.
328. Conversion of community property into public property: (1) If
any community holding any community property does not use it or
makes an application, signed by the main persons of all families of
such community, setting out that it is not necessary to use such
community property in its purpose, to the concerned Land Revenue
Office, the concerned Land Revenue Officer may make necessary
inquiry into the matter and convert such property into the public
property.
In the event of conversion of any community property
into the public property pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned
Land Revenue Officer shall have to make necessary entries in the
records maintained in his/her Office and give information thereof to
the concerned District Administration Office and Local Body.
329. To reward complainant: (1) Any person may make a complaint
with the concerned body on the matters of registration, or aiding to the
registration, of a government, public or community property, or
possession, use or cultivation of a land under such property or
construction work done in such land, in contravention of this Chapter.
If, on inquiring into a complaint made pursuant to subsection (1), the complaint is held to be true, the concerned body shall
have to provide the complainant with a reward in a sum that is half the
fine imposed on the wrongdoer pursuant to this Chapter.
The concerned body may keep confidential a complaint
made pursuant to sub-section (1).
320. Departmental action to be taken: If any employee, either knowingly
or recklessly, registers, or causes to be registered, any government,
public or community property in the name of any person or if any
employee with the duty to render assistance pursuant to this Chapter
does not render any assistance, such employee shall be liable to
departmental action in accordance with law relating to the terms and
conditions of his/her service.
321. Government attorney empowered to file or make case, petition or
appeal:
(1) The concerned government attorney shall have power
to file or make a case, petition or appeal against any decision made by
some body or authority, adversely affecting any government, public or
community property.
The concerned office or authority shall have to provide
the government attorney with such documents and other assistance as
may be necessary in relation to the filing or making of a case, petition
or appeal pursuant to sub-section (1).
322. Limitation: A person may file a lawsuit at any time in the cases of
Sections 324, 325 and 326 of this Chapter, and a person who is
aggrieved from any act done in accordance with the other Sections of
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six months from
the date on which such an act is done.

Chapter-6
Provisions Concerning Trusts
333. Trust deemed to be established: If a person makes necessary
arrangements for the operation and management of a property in
which the person has right, ownership and possession by another for
the benefit of beneficiary, a trust shall be deemed to be established.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"beneficiary" means persons, groups, general public, incorporated or
unincorporated bodies corporate or communities who get the benefit
from the trust property.
324. Trust may be public or private: (1) A trust may be either public or
private.
A trust established for the accomplishment of the
following object shall be deemed to be a public trust:
To establish, operate and use a fund for economic
development infrastructures or other development works,
To establish and operate a fund necessary for the
development of skills, generation of employment
opportunity and development of the people with low
income,
To operate social welfare programs,
To establish and operate such educational and academic
institutes like schools, colleges and universities as may
be useful for the general public,
To establish and operate dispensaries such as hospitals
and health posts for public purposes,
To protect natural, historical or cultural heritages or
promote such protection,
To operate wildlife, aquatic animals or environment
protection programs,
To operate programs relating to the upliftment or welfare
of women, children, indigenous/nationalities, downtrodden or backward classes or communities,
To operate programs relating to sports,
To carry out service-oriented welfare programs,
To operate rescue works,
To establish shrines, temples, monasteries, domes,
mosques, churches or carry out similar other religious
activities,
To operate other public programs for public interest.
A trust which is established with object to render benefit,
advantage or facility to any particular person or group shall be
deemed to be a private trust.
If a trust is established to accomplish both public and
private objects, such a trust shall be deemed to be a public trust.
335. Application to be made for establishment of trust: (1) A person or
organization who intends to establish a trust shall make an application,
setting out the following matters, to the Registrar:
Value and details of the property held for the trust,
Beneficiaries, and benefit and facility to them, details of
the terms and extent thereof,
If the trust is to be established for any particular period,
matters relating thereto,
Other necessary details.
In making an application pursuant to sub-section (1), the
following documents have also to be submitted along with the
application:
Instrument of the trust,
Trustee's name and photocopy of the deed relating to
his/her consent,
Photocopy of the deed, if any, executed for the
establishment of the trust,
Photocopy of a reliable deed relating to the trust settler's
identity, and, in the case of the trust settler being a body
corporate, certified copies of the documents relating to
the incorporation of the body corporate and of the
decision by such body corporate in relation to the
establishment of trust,
Receipt of payment of the fees chargeable by law for the
registration of trust.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter:
"Person" means a natural person or a body corporate is
competent to conclude a contract pursuant to this Code.
"Registrar" means the authority provided for by law for
the registration, supervision and liquidation of trusts, and
this term also includes the Land Revenue Officer in the
concerned district if such authority is not so provided for.
"Trustee" means the person who is responsible for the
operation and management of a trust property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a person has, by way of his/her oral behavior, conduct or a
testamentary gift or will, provided for the operation and management
of a property in which he/she has right, ownership and possession as a
trust, the trust shall be deemed to have been established by such
behavior, conduct or will.
Provided that in the case of a property requiring registration
pass for the transfer of its title in accordance with law, a deed
pertaining to such transfer has to be registered.
If a foreign person or body corporate intends to establish
a trust, the person or body has to make an application upon fulfilling
the procedures as referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2). A foreign
person or body corporate may be the founder of the trust to be so
established.
Provided that at least one trustee of the trustees of such a trust
has to have permanent residence in Nepal.
336. Details to be set out in instrument: The following matters have to be
set out in the instrument of a trust:
Names, surnames and addresses and founders of the trust,
and, if a body corporate is the founder, names, surnames
and addresses of the directors of such a body,
Objects and nature of the trust,
Names, surnames and addresses of the trustees,
description of work to be performed by them, and, if a
body corporate is a trustee, name, surname and address of
the person designated by the body to act as the trustee,
Details of the beneficiaries,
Method of use of the trust property,
Details of the tenure of the trustee, if any, so specified,
If the trustees are entitled to remuneration or other
facilities, details thereof and limitation,
If the trust is intended to be established for a certain
period, such a period,
In the event of termination of the trust, consequences
thereof,
Provisions relating to the operation, management and
monitoring of the trust property,
Other necessary matters.
337. Registration of a trust: (1) If an application is made for the
establishment of a trust pursuant to Section 335, the Registrar shall
make necessary inquiry into the objects of the trust and the details of
the property proposed for the establishment of the trust, and, if it
seems reasonable to register the trust, register the trust and issue the
trust registration certificate, within a period of thirty five days of the
making of such an application.
If a trust is registered pursuant to sub-section (1), the
trust is deemed to have been established.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a private trust may be operated even without registration.
338. Power to refuse registration of a trust: (1) Notwithstanding any
thing contained in Section 337, the Registrar may refuse to register a
trust in any of the following circumstances:
If the details, documents or fees as referred to in Section
335 are not mentioned or paid,
If the name of the trust resembles with the name of any
other trust which has already been registered before the
registration of the trust applied for,
If the objects or terms of the trust appear to be
inappropriate or undesirable for reasons of public interest,
decency, courtesy or public order, are not lawful or are
not possible to be implemented owing to their uncertainty
or vagueness.
If a trust is not capable of being registered pursuant to
sub-section (1), the Registrar shall give information, along with the
reason for refusal, to the applicant within thirty five days.
If, upon receipt of information pursuant to sub-section (2),
the applicant, upon making necessary corrections, makes an
application again for the registration of the trust, the Registrar shall
register the trust and issue the registration certificate pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 337, within fifteen days of the making of such
an application.
339. Transfer of property to be made for incorporation of trust: (1)
The trust founder shall have to transfer the property settled for the
trust to the trustee within a period of three months of the
establishment of the trust.
If the property to be transferred pursuant to sub-section
(1) is an immovable property, such property shall be deemed to have
been duly transferred only when it is transferred in accordance with
A foreign person or body corporate that establishes a
trust in Nepal shall have to remit into Nepal a movable property equal
to at least one hundred thousand American dollars through regular
banking channel and hand over the same to the trustee within three
months.
The information of the handover of the movable property
pursuant to sub-section (3) has to be given to the Registrar.
340. Dissolution of a trust on failure of transfer of property: In the
event of failure to transfer property within the time-limit referred to in

Section 339, the registration of such a trust shall ipso facto be void
and the trust shall deemed to be dissolved.
341. Administration and use of trust property according to the
instrument: (1) The trustee shall have to administer and manage the
trust property subject to the terms and restrictions set forth in the
instrument.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, the
trustee shall, in administering and managing the property pursuant to
sub-section (1), not sell, mortgage, or otherwise transfer title to, the
immovable property or any part thereof without prior approval of the
concerned Registrar.
In asking for prior approval of the Registrar pursuant to
sub-section (2), the reason for the sale, mortgage of, or transfer of title
to, such property, and the reasons and grounds that it may result in
more benefit to the beneficiary have to be set out.
342. Duty to administer and manage trust property properly: (1) The
trustee shall have to administer and manage the trust property properly,
by exercising his/her capacity and diligence honestly.
In the administration and management of the trust
property pursuant to sub-section (1), the trustee shall have to make
arrangement to avoid any loss and damage to, and maintain
sustainability of, such a property.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, in the
administration and management of the trust property pursuant to subsections (1) and (2), income earned from the trust property which is
not required immediately to accomplish the objects of the trust may be
invested in the accomplishment of the objects of trust.
Except as otherwise mentioned in the instrument, in
making investment pursuant to sub-section (3), it may be invested as
follows in the following proportion of the total sum:
At least twenty five percent in the purchase of bonds or
treasury bills issued by the Government of Nepal or the
Nepal Rastra Bank or bonds guaranteed by the
Government of Nepal,
Deposit of a maximum of twenty five percent in a fixed
account with a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed account
with a development bank,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of
ordinary shares of a commercial bank,
Deposit of a maximum of ten percent in a fixed account
with a finance company,
A maximum of five percent in the subscription of such
ordinary shares of an enlisted public limited company as
are dealt openly.
The trustee shall have to carry out updated monitoring as
to the investment made pursuant to sub-section (4); and if the returns
of investment made in one sector be lesser, such investment has to be
withdrawn immediately and made in another sector yielding more
returns, subject to the terms and restrictions of the investment.
In making monitoring or investment pursuant to subsection (5), opinion of an expert in the concerned sector may, as
required, be obtained.
The opinion obtained pursuant to sub-section (6) may be
taken as the basis for monitoring or investment.
The trustee shall have to maintain his/her personal
property and the trust property separately and administer and mange
the trust property accordingly; and in the event of a need to operate an
account, separate accounts have to be maintained.
343. Trustee to be appointed: (1) A trustee shall be appointed for the
administration, management, protection, care of the trust property and
use of benefits of such property to the benefit of the beneficiary or
making proper arrangements for the same.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, the
founder of trust shall appoint the trustee.
In the event of the failure to appoint or inability to
appoint a trustee pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the founder of trust
himself or herself shall be deemed to be the trustee.
344. Disqualification of trustee: The following person shall not be
qualified to be a trustee:
A person who is not competent to make a contract,
A person who has embezzled property in his/her custody,
A person who is convicted by a court of the offense of
corruption,
A person who has been sentenced on a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude,
A person who is the sole beneficiary of the trust property.
345. Number of beneficiary: Except as otherwise provided for in the
instrument, the number of beneficiaries shall be one in minimum and
seven in maximum.
346. Body corporate being eligible to be a trustee: (1) A body corporate
which is established in accordance with law may be appointed as a
trustee.
In the event of appointment of a body corporate as
referred to in sub-section (1), the person working as the chief of such
body or a person to whom the power is delegated by a decision of the
board of directors of such body shall have to act on behalf of such
body.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "the
person working as the chief" means the chairperson, director,
managing director, general manager, executive director of such a body
or a person empowered by such a body to work as its chief.
347. Provisions concerning vacancy in office of a trustee: (1)
office of the trustee shall be vacant in any of the following
circumstances:
If the person is not qualified to be a trustee,
If the person resigns from the office of a trustee,
If the person dies or is dissolved or liquidated or
insolvent in accordance with law,
If the trust is established for a certain period, the period is
completed,
If the trustee is appointed for certain tenure, the tenure is
completed,
If the trustee is removed by the trust founder or court on
the ground that he/she has embezzled the trust property
or has not taken a reasonable care of such property.
If the office of trustee is vacant pursuant to sub-section
(1), the office has to be filled in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the instrument.
In the event of failure to fill the office of trustee pursuant
to sub-section (2), the beneficiary, if available, and the concerned
Local Body, if there is no beneficiary or beneficiary cannot be
identified, shall make an application, accompanied by a list of
possible candidates, to the concerned District Court for the
appointment of a trustee.
If an application is made for the appointment of trustee
pursuant to sub-section (3), the concerned District Court shall, in tune
with the spirit of the instrument, appoint to the office of trustee an
appropriate person from the list of candidates provided by the
applicant.
If any trustee is relieved of his/her office by virtue of the
circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), he/she shall, as promptly
as possible, hand over the trust property in his/her custody, control or
use to other trustee; and he/she shall not get immunity from any kind
of liability or legal action for any act or action done or taken by
him/her while in office of trustee by the reason only that he/she has
been so relieved of office.
If the office of trustee of a public trust which has only
one trustee falls vacant or is fulfilled pursuant to this Section, the
information thereof has to be given to the Registrar.
348. To specify roll of succession of trustees: (1) Except as otherwise
mentioned as to the roll of succession of trustees in the instrument,
after the death of a trustee, his/her eldest son, daughter-in-law or
daughter shall succeed the office of trustee according to the roll of
succession; and if there is no one out of them, the person who is
entitled to inherit him/her shall inherit the office of trustee.
If a person who becomes the trustee pursuant to subsection (1) is not qualified to be the trustee, his/her guardian or person
taking care of him/her shall perform the obligation of the trustee on
his/her behalf until such person is disqualified.
Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, if
there is a provision that one's descendents are entitled to be the trustee,
the descendents of such person shall succeed the office of trustee
according to the limit of their respective rights; and in such a case, the
provisions contained in Section 345 shall not be applicable.
349. Requirement to perform obligation of trustee in special
circumstance: If there exists a situation that the office of a trustee
falls vacant in entirety and the office cannot be filled immediately
pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 347, the Local Body shall have
to function as the trustee until the office is so filled.
350. Requirement to operate trust by unanimity: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the instrument, the trust containing two or
more trustees has to be operated by unanimous decision of all the
trustees as far as possible.
In the event of failure to reach unanimity pursuant to subsection (1), the trust may be operated by a majority decision of the
then existing trustees, and if that is not possible, by the decision of the
eldest trustee.
351. To carry out object of trust: The trustee shall have to carry out the
object of a trust as set forth in the instrument of the trust, and in so
carrying out the object, the trustee shall have to discharge functions
honestly and according to his/her capacity and diligence.
352. To maintain records of trust property: (1) The trustee shall have to
prepare an inventory of the trust property and update the records
thereof, and, in the case of a public trust, a copy of such records has to
be submitted to the Registrar each year.
The inventory as referred to in sub-section (1) has to
reflect the movable and immovable property, loans, assets, or if such
property has been invested in any business, principal, interest or other
returns of such investment.
353. Protection of trust property: (1) The trustee shall have to maintain
and protect the trust property, and may make any kind of such legal
action or complete any kind of such formality with any public
authority as may be required for this purpose.
In maintaining or protecting the trust property, the trustee
shall take proper and reasonable care of, and do act conducive to the
enhancement of, the trustee property as if the property were his/her
354. Prohibition on possession and use of trust property in manner to
prejudice benefit of beneficiary: No trustee shall so possess or use
the trust property for himself or herself or other person as may be
prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary.
355. Duty to prevent loss to trust property: (1) It shall be the duty of the
trustee to prevent destruction, termination of, or otherwise loss to, the
trust property in a manner prejudicial to the benefit of the beneficiary
or contrary to the object of the trust.
If the trust property is not managed properly or is made
subject to cheating or fraud or is embezzled or used for other purposes,
any trustee or beneficiary may, subject to the provisions set forth in
the instrument, file a petition in the court for the prevention of such
embezzlement.
Provided that any person may file a petition in the cases of a
public trust.
If, upon a petition filed pursuant to sub-section (2), it is
held that the trust property has not been managed properly or has been
made subject to cheating or fraud or embezzled or used for other
purposes, the court shall recover the amount in question from the
embezzler and may also order compensation to be paid by a trustee if
the trustee has committed such an embezzlement.
356. To maintain accounts of a trust: (1) The trustee shall have to
maintain accounts in a manner to reflect clearly and actually the
accounts of the trust property, and provide statements thereof if the
Registrar, trust founder or beneficiary, if any identified, intends to
inspect the same.
In the case of a public trust, the trustee shall have its
accounts audited by a recognized auditor each year and submit a copy
of the audit report to the Registrar.
357. Breach of trust: (1) If a trustee fails to fulfill the duties required to be
fulfilled pursuant to this Chapter, the trustee shall be deemed to have
committed a breach of trust.
In the event of the breach of trust pursuant to sub-section
(1), the trustee so breaching trust shall be responsible for the loss and
damage caused to the beneficiary from such breach and bear liability
for the same.
In bearing the liability pursuant to sub-section (2), the
trustee breaching trust shall bear such profits as may be equal to the
income or profits which the trust or beneficiary would have made or
earned if the trust had not been breached.
If a trust has two or more trustees, all trustees who
commit a breach of trust shall collectively bear the liability for the
loss and damage caused from such breach of trust.
If, in relation to one portion of any trust, the trust is
breached, and, in relation to another portion of the trust, benefit is
derived, the trustee shall not use the benefit in the fulfillment of
his/her liability.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the trustee shall not bear the liability for the loss and damage
caused from the breach of trust committed by the trustee, in the
following circumstance:
If the loss and damage is caused by operation of law,
If the loss and damage is a result of the breach of trust by
any act done by the previous trustee or the consequence
thereof.
358. Deed of trust property to remain with trustee: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in the instrument of a trust, the deeds,
documents of the ownership and possession of the trust property and
other proofs and evidences pertaining thereto shall all be in the
custody of the trustee, and in the case of a public trust, copies of such
deeds and documents shall be submitted to the Registrar.
Provided that in the case of the deeds, documents or evidences
required to be approved by the Registrar, it is not required to submit
the copies of such deeds, documents or evidences.
The trustee and the Registrar shall safely retain the deeds,
documents and evidences as referred to in sub-section (1).
359. Entitlement
reimbursement
trust
property:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if the
trustee has used his/her personal property or other's property in the
course of the protection of the trust property, accomplishment of the
object of trust or protection of the benefit of the beneficiary, the
trustee shall be entitled to have reimbursement of the amount for such
property from the trust property.
360. Other powers, duties and liabilities deemed to be vested with
trustee: Except as otherwise provided for in the instrument, in
addition to the powers, duties and liabilities clearly set forth in this
Chapter, such other reasonable powers and duties as may be required
for the implementation and accomplishment of the object of trust, care
and protection of the trust property and protection of the rights and
benefits of the beneficiary shall be deemed to be vested with the
trustee.
361. Prohibited acts by trustee: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in
the instrument, no trustee shall do, or cause to be done, any of the
following acts:
To use the trust property in any manner other than in the
accomplishment of the object of trust,
To use, or caused to be used, the trust property in any act
yielding profit to the trustee himself or herself or any one
else, except in the accomplishment of the object of trust,
To delegate or hand over the responsibility or obligation
of trustee to another trustee or other person,
Provided that nothing shall bar the appointing of his/her
agent or attorney in the course of ordinary transaction or
assigning of any responsibility or obligation if such
responsibility or obligation is to be assigned in view of
the nature of such transaction or assigning of any
responsibility to another person with the consent of the
beneficiary, if any, identified.
To carry out any act relating to the trust solely contrary to

Section 350 if there are two or more trustees,
To obtain any remuneration, allowance or facility in
consideration for being the trustee,
Provided that nothing shall bar the receiving of
reasonable remuneration, allowance or facility for any
work done whole-time or part-time after establishing the
office or with the prior approval of the Registrar, without
prejudicing the object of the trust or benefit of the
beneficiary,
To purchase or otherwise pledge, mortgage, lease or rent
the property of the trust for which he/she is trustee before
at least three years of his/her assumption of, or retirement
from, the office of trustee.
The trustee shall not make any economic transaction
between his/her private property and the trust property. He/she has to
make compensation for the loss, if any, to the trust property from such
The trustee shall not merge his/her property with the trust
property.
362. To give direction to transfer trust property: Except as otherwise
provided for in the instrument, in the case of only one beneficiary,
after he/she becomes competent to enter into contract, and in the case
of two or more beneficiaries, after each of them becomes competent to
enter into contract and reach consensus, such beneficiary or
beneficiaries may direct the trustee to hand over the trust property to
him/her or them; and if any direction is so given, it shall be the duty of
the trustee to abide by such direction.
Provided that this provision shall not apply to the public trust.
363. Power to relinquish benefit of trust property: (1) In the case of a
private trust, the beneficiary who is competent to enter into contract
may, by a notice in writing to the trustee and the Registrar, relinquish
any or all of his/her entitlement, benefit, facility or interest from the
trust property.
If each and every beneficiary wholly relinquishes the
entitlement, benefit, facility or interest from the trust property
pursuant to sub-section (1), such trust shall be deemed to have been
dissolved.
364. Duty to maintain ownership of trust property: (1) The trust
property shall be entered as such in the records of trust and held in the
name of the person mentioned in the instrument or in the name of the
beneficiary if any such person is not mentioned in the instrument.
If, in the case of a public trust, the instrument provides
for the establishment of a separate body corporate for the
administration and management of the trust property, such property
shall be held in the name of the body corporate so established.
365. Alteration in object of trust: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, if the trust founder considers appropriate to
make any amendment or alteration in the object set forth in the
instrument at the time of the creation of trust, he/she may make an
application, accompanied by the reason for such amendment or
alteration, to the Registrar.
If, on an inquiry into an application made pursuant to
sub-section (1), the reason for the amendment or alteration in the
object set forth in the instrument seems to be reasonable, the Registrar
may issue an order to or alter such object, and, if any order is so made,
the object set forth in the instrument shall be deemed to have been
amended or altered accordingly.
366. Trust property not to be counted: Any trust property administered
and managed by the trustee shall not be counted as the property of the
trustee for the purpose of assessment of tax or for any other purpose.
Provided that in the case of a person who derives any benefit,
facility or interest from such property, such benefit, facility or interest
shall be counted.
367. Consequence of dissolution of trust: (1) If a trust once established is
dissolved or become void for any reason, such dissolution or voidance
shall not affect any act already done.
In the event of dissolution or voidance of a trust pursuant
to sub-section (1), in the case of a public trust, except as otherwise
provided for in the instrument, the trustee may, by order of the
Registrar, hand over the trust property to any other trust with the
identical object or to any public organization with similar objects if
such other trust is not available; and in the case of a private trust, the
trustee shall hand over the trust property to the beneficiary, if he/she is
identified or to the nearest heir to the beneficiary if the beneficiary is
not available or to the trust founder if such heir is not available or to
the heir to the trust founder if even the trust founder is not available.
If the organization or person as referred to in sub-section
(2) is not available, the property of the dissolved or voided trust shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal.
368. Power to make appeal: A party who is not satisfied with any order or
decision made by the Registrar pursuant to this Chapter may make an
appeal to the concerned Appellate Court within a period of thirty five
days from the date of knowledge of such an order or a decision.
369. Not to affect other trust: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall
affect any trust which has been established and in operation at the
time of the commencement of this Code and enjoyment of any residue
upon carrying out the activity set forth in the memorandum of
donation of the concerned trust or as per the usages and customs.
Provided that such a trust has to be administered and managed
upon having it registered within three years of the commencement of
this Code.
370. Limitation: (1) There shall be no limitation in relation to the
following matters where a person who is aggrieved from any activity
carried out pursuant to this Chapter is to make a lawsuit:
Embezzlement of the trust property,
Fraud or forgery in any deed relating to the trust property,
Embezzlement or misappropriation of the trust property,
Derivation of benefit by the trustee in contravention of
the terms of the instrument of the trust,
Restitution of the trust property or its value or income
from the trustee or other person.
A lawsuit may be file within a period of six months from
the date of cause of action in relation to any matters other than those
set forth in sub-section (1).

Chapter-7
Provisions Concerning Usufruct
371. Usufruct deemed to be constituted: (1) When a person gives free a
property in which he/she has right and ownership and fruits, benefit,
income or facility of the property to another person entitling that other
person to enjoy such property and fruits, benefit, income or facility
thereof, usufruct shall be deemed to be constituted.
The provisions of usufruct shall be as set forth in a will
or a contract entered into between the concerned persons.
Provided that in giving usufruct with effect from testament, it
may be given by way of a will.
372. Usufruct to be effective: (1) The provision of usufruct constituted by
a contract shall become effective on the date of the commencement of
the contract unless otherwise set forth in the contract.
The provision of usufruct constituted by a will shall
become effective in accordance with the term of effectiveness of the
will, and failing such terms, on the date of the effectiveness or the
date of conclusion of the will.
The provision of usufruct so given as to be effective on
testament shall become effective after the death of the person
executing such will.
373. Deed to be executed: (1) In giving an immovable property in
usufruct, its owner has to execute a deed to that effect in accordance
with law.
In giving a property in common in usufruct, consent of
the coparceners has to be obtained.
374. Entitlement of usufructuary to enjoy property as if it belonges to
him/her: (1) If a person gives another person his/her property in
usufruct, the usufructuary of such property shall be entitled to enjoy
the property, fruits, benefit, income or facility to be yielded or earned
from the property and fruits, benefit, income or facility accrued from
the property as if it were his/her own property.
If there are two or more usufructuaries obtaining a
property pursuant to sub-section (1), each usufructuary shall be
entitled to enjoy that property jointly or severally.
If a property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
partitioned, each coparcener who is entitled to enjoy the property in
usufruct shall be entitled to enjoy the property pursuant to sub-section
A usufructuary may make a lawsuit in the court, as
required, for the protection or enjoyment of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct.
375. Property
which
usufructuary
entitled
enjoy:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 374, a usufructuary
shall not be entitled to enjoy the following properties relating to the
property obtained under the provision of usufruct:
Mines and minerals related with the property,
Provided that where the mines are the subject of
usufruct, the mines may be enjoyed.
Grown trees.
Provided that fruits, flowers or other products
obtained from trees may be enjoyed.
376. Prohibition on alteration in structure of property without
consent: The usufructuary shall not be entitled to significantly alter
the substance or form of the property obtained under the provision of
usufruct or to destroy such property, except with the prior approval of
the owner.
Provided that if the enjoyment of the property given under the
provision of usufruct is not possible without an alteration in the form
of or destruction of the property, except as otherwise provided for in
the contract or will, the property may be enjoyed by altering its form
or destroying it, on payment of the price that may be set at the time of
returning such property back.
377. Power to rent, lease or mortgage property under provision of
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary may, if he/she so desires, rent, lease or
mortgage the property obtained under the provision of usufruct, by
executing a deed to that effect.
Provided that:
It is not required to execute a deed for renting a property
for a monthly rent not exceeding ten thousand rupees.
Where a property is so rented, leased or mortgaged, the
usufructuary has to give information thereof to the owner.
The property obtained under the provision of usufruct
may not be rented, leased or mortgaged for a period that
exceeds the validity period of usufruct.
In renting, leasing or mortgaging the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct, the relevant deed shall also indicate
that the property is under the provision of usufruct.
Where a rent, lease or mortgage of the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct is executed in contravention of the
provisions set forth in sub-sections (1) and (2), such transaction shall
ipso facto be void.
A person who obtains a property on rent, lease or
mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be entitled to enjoy the
property as if the person were the usufructuary.
378. Duty to maintain and care property under the provision of
usufruct: (1) The usufructuary has to maintain and take care of the
property which he/she has obtained under the provision of usufruct
properly and reasonably as if it were his/her own property.
If a person obtains a property under the provision of
usufruct by way of rent, lease or mortgage, the person has to take care
of such property properly and reasonably.
The usufructuary has to maintain the property obtained
under the provision of usufruct at his/her cost.
Provided that in the event of a need to maintain such property
by spending a substantial amount in consequence of a natural calamity,
the usufructuary has to give information thereof to the owner, and the
owner has to bear such maintenance expenses.
379. Prohibition on damaging property obtained under the provision
of usufruct: (1) The usufructuary shall not damage, or cause to be
damaged, the property obtained under the provision of usufruct.
If such property is damaged in any manner in the course
of its enjoyment by the usufructuary or a person who obtains it on rent,
lease or mortgage pursuant to Section 377, the usufructuary shall be
liable for it.
Provided that the usufructuary shall not be liable for any
damage caused to such property by a natural calamity.
The usufructuary may make or adopt insurance or other
necessary preventive measures for the protection of the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct against possible damage in
the course of its enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2).
380. Usufructuary to bear annual tax or fees: The usufructuary has to
pay such tax or fees as may be leviable by law in relation to the
property obtained under the provision of usufruct.
Provided that the owner shall bear the property tax payable for
the property given under the provision of usufruct.
381. Information of claim or interference by any one to be given to
owner: (1) If any one makes encroachment, claim or interference on
or with the property under the provision of usufruct, the usufructuary
has to give information thereof to the owner within fifteen days of
such encroachment, claim or interference.
The usufructuary who does not give information pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be liable to any consequence thereof.
382. Validity period of provision of usufruct: (1) The provision of
usufruct shall remain valid for the period set forth in the contract or
will.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the provision of usufruct shall not remain valid beyond the following
period except as otherwise provided for in the contract or will:
Where the usufructuary is a natural person, the death of
the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of forty
nine years since the execution of the provision of
usufruct, whichever occurs earlier,
Where the usufructuary is a legal person, the dissolution
of the usufructuary or the expiration of a period of twenty
nine years since the execution of the provision of
usufruct, whichever occurs earlier.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"dissolution" includes the termination, liquidation,
revocation of registration or insolvency of a legal person.
In the case of more than one usufructuary, the property in
usufruct shall devolve on the owner in proportion to the death or
dissolution of any usufructuary, except as otherwise provided for in
the contract or will.
383. Power to cancel provision of usufruct: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 382, if the usufructuary damages or
misuses the property obtained under the provision of usufruct or does
not enjoy it for the purpose for which it has been given in usufruct or
otherwise does any act that prejudices the right of the owner in such
property, the concerned owner may cancel the provision of usufruct at
any time.
In the event of cancellation of the provision of usufruct
pursuant to sub-section (1), the usufructuary has to return the property
obtained under the provision of usufruct.
384. Power to return property by usufructuary: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 382 or 383, if the usufructuary does not
wish to enjoy the property obtained under the provision of usufruct,
the usufructuary may return such property to the owner at any time,
by giving a notice of at least forty five days.
385. Usufruct deemed to be extinguished: (1) The provision of usufruct
shall be deemed to be extinguished in any of the following
circumstances:
If the validity period of usufruct expires pursuant to

Section 382,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“usufruct expires" means:
If two or more natural persons are usufructuary, the
usufruct shall be deemed to lapse on the date on
which the last survivor usufructuary dies.
If two or more legal persons are usufructuary, the
usufruct shall be deemed to lapse on the date on
which the last usufructuary is dissolved.
If the property is returned on the cancellation of usufruct
pursuant to Section 383,
If the usufructuary returns the property in usufruct
pursuant to Section 384,
If, except for a reasonable ground, the usufructuary fails
to enjoy the property in usufruct until six months after
the date on which the provision of usufruct becomes
effective,
If the specific purpose for the accomplishment of which
the provision of usufruct has been made is accomplished,
If the property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
not capable of being transferred to the usufructuary in
accordance with law,
If the property obtained under the provision of usufruct is
lost totally.
In the event of the extinguishment of the provision of
usufruct pursuant to sub-section (1), the property given to any person
in usufruct shall ipso facto devolve on the owner except in the
circumstance set forth in clause (f) or (g).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), where a property is given in usufruct on the condition that it shall
remain valid until a person attains a certain age, the provision of
usufruct shall remain valid until the date on which the person attains
that age even if the person dies before the date of attainment of such
386. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of knowledge of the commission of such act.

Chapter-8
Provisions Concerning Servitudes
387. Servitude to be deemed: (1) If there is a provision entitling the
owner of an immovable property to enjoy or use any immovable
property or any part thereof in which another person has title,
ownership or possession, a servitude shall be deemed to have been
created.
(2) A servitude shall be in existence in accordance with the
contract, nature, customs and usages of the place where the
immovable property is located.
388. Servitude to be allowed: (1) If there is a provision of servitude
pursuant to Section 387, the owner of the concerned immovable
property shall allow another person to enjoy or use the immovable
property in accordance with the provision of servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
there is a provision of servitude for public purposes, such a servitude
may also be used for personal purpose as well.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a servitude created by operation of law may be used in
accordance with law.
389. Servitude not to be adversely affected by transfer of immovable
property: (1) A servitude in a servient immovable property shall
continue to exist even if the owner of such immovable property
transfers all or any of such property in which he/she has right and
ownership to another person in any manner.
Even if the servient immovable property is partitioned,
each coparcener shall be deemed to have provided such servitude.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if, while transferring or partitioning a servient immovable
property, there is a provision of servitude elsewhere in such property
and servitude is not thus required to be provided in the immovable
property in which a person acquires right by way of such transfer or
partition, the servitude shall be deemed to extinguish to that extent.
390. To allow enjoyment or use: (1) If any land in which a person has
title, ownership or possession has been in use since ancient time as a
public or community road, cattle exit, pasture land, ditch, cannel, quay,
pond, public road, track road or main road, inn, tomb, graveyard,
shrine, temple, monastery, dome, mosque or church, community
school, hospital or similar other public site, the land has to be allowed
to be used accordingly for the particular purpose.
The owner or possessor of the servient land shall not
cultivate or use, make any structure in or otherwise own or possess it
in such a manner as to adversely affect the provision set forth in subsection (1).
391. Use of neighbor's house or land at time of natural calamity: If, at
the time of natural calamity such as fire, earthquake, volcano and
flood, it is not possible to rescue victims of such calamity without
entering or using the house or land of a person, the victims may be
rescued, or cause to be rescued, by entering the house or land with the
consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is available and
even without consent of the owner of the house or land if the owner is
not available for the time being or refuses to give consent.
Provided that compensation for any loss or damage caused from
such entry shall be provided to the owner of house or land concerned.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "the owner of
house or land" means the person who is using, possessing or
controlling the concerned house or land for the time being.
392. Acquisition of servitude of passage: (1) If the passage originally
available to have access to and from a house or land is destroyed due
to a natural calamity, a person who has been using the passage to and
from such house or land from the past shall have the servitude of a
reasonable passage to the public road.
A person who uses the passage to be maintained pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall provide a reasonable compensation to the
owner of house or land concerned.
A person shall not be entitled to demand the servitude of
passage from the owners of all houses or land pursuant to sub-section
(1); and he/she may demand such servitude from the owner of the
house or land through which the distance to the public road is the
shortest.
393. Prohibition on transfer of house or land without provision of
passage or exit: (1) In setting aside and transferring any part of the
house or land with the provision of passage or exit, such house or land
shall not transferred without making provision of passage or exit to
both purchaser and seller.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
there is another passage or exit to and from such house or land, it is
not required to make provision of passage or exit.
394. Power to extent basic services: If it is not possible to provide basic
services such as sewerage, water supply, electricity, gas and telephone
service to the house of a person through his/her own land or public,
government or community land, the person shall be entitled to lay
pipe or line in such a manner as not to cause any loss or damage to the
owner of such land.
Provided that in so providing the basic services through the
land of another person, the recipient of the services shall provide a
reasonable compensation to the owner of the land concerned.
395. Power to use river or stream or river or stream bank: Any person
may carry out movement, navigation, boating or fishing in the river or
stream which is situated in, or originated from, the personal property
of any person or within the zone of a maximum of three meters in
either side of such river or stream.
Provided that such activity is not allowed in small rivulets that
do not have perennial flow of water.
396. Power to use exit road: (1) If a river or stream is diverted or a
reservoir is built or a dam is made for any reason in the river or stream,
the owner of land concerned shall provide a reasonable exit for the
general public and livestock to have access to and from such diversion,
reservoir or dam.
Provided that an appropriate compensation has to be provided
to the owner of land concerned for the land used in the provision of
such access.
If, in maintaining the provision of exit passage as
referred to in sub-section (1), it is possible to maintain such exit
passage through the land of two or more persons, the exit passage
shall, unless provided otherwise, be maintained through the nearest
land that is technically feasible for the access to the diversion,
reservoir or dam.
397. Prohibition on prevention of natural flow of water: (1) The owner
of each house or land shall himself or herself manage the rain water
flowing from his/her house or land.
If there is no provision as referred to in sub-section (1),
the rain water has to be allowed to make its natural course.
Provided that no water has to be let to so flow as to cause
adverse effect on the downstream land by making a ditch, controlling
floods or otherwise diverting the flow or through human intervention.
398. Right to use stream, river or pond water: Any person may use the
stream or river which is originated from or flows through or the pond
water which is situated in the land of another person.
399. Requirement to allow passage or exit for farming: (1) If a person
does not have a passage or exit for people or livestock to have access
to and from his/her farm land and needs such passage or exit, the
owner of land concerned shall provide the facility of passage or exit to
such person.
Provided that no person shall be compelled to provide such
passage or exit through the house and compound land.
A person who uses the passage or exit pursuant to subsection (1) shall use in such a way that no loss or damage is caused to
the crops or other property of the person providing such passage or
exit.
If any loss or damage is caused to any crops or property
by the use of the passage or exit pursuant to sub-section (2), the
person using the passage or exit shall provide compensation to the
owner of land concerned for the crops or other property so lost or
damaged.
400. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of knowledge of the commission of such act.

Chapter-9
Provisions Concerning House Rent
401. House deemed to be rented: If a person who has title, possession or
ownership in a house lends the house to another person to use it for a
certain period of time, the rent shall be deemed to be created.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"house" means any house, storey, unit or room of the house or land or
cartilage occupied by the land.
402. Prohibition on renting unsafe house: No person shall rent a house
which is not safe for human habitation from health and security
perspectives.
Provided that the standards of house for non-residential
purposes such as a warehouse, livestock farming, storage and cold
storage shall be as specified in the house rent agreement.
403. Period of house rent: (1) The period of house rent shall be as set
forth in the agreement, with a maximum period of rent being five
years.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
after the expiration of the period of house rent, the period may be
extended at times with the consent of the house owner and the tenant.
404. Agreement to be made while renting: (1) While renting a house, its
owner shall enter into an agreement in writing with the tenant, setting
out the following matters:
Full names and addresses of the owner and the tenant, their
citizenship number, and passport or identification certificate, in
the case of a foreigner,
Place and plot number of land where the house is located,
Purpose for rent,
Date of commencement of rent,
Validity period of rent,
Monthly rent,
Time and mode of payment of rent amount,
Liability to pay tariffs of electricity, water supply, telephone etc.
used in the house,
If the house rent tax is chargeable, matter on payment of the tax,
If the rented house is to be insured, matter relating to the
insurance,
Matter on leaving the rented house and eviction of the tenant
from it,
Matter as to whether the rented house can be sublet to another,
Other necessary matters.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it
is not necessary to enter into an agreement in writing with the tenant if
the monthly house rent does not exceed ten thousand rupees.
A photograph of tenant has also to be affixed to the
agreement referred to in sub-section (1).
The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) has also to
be signed by at least two witnesses of each side, namely the house
owner and the tenant, and a copy thereof has to be retained by each of
the owner and the tenant.
After the completion of the procedures as referred to in
sub-section (4), an agreement shall be deemed to have been entered
into between the house owner and the tenant.
405. Details of house to be provided: In renting a house, the owner shall,
at the time of entering into agreement, disclose defect or fault, if any,
in the structure of the house to the tenant.
406. Preparation of description of goods or chattels: (1) The house
owner shall, prior to renting his/her house, prepare a description of
goods or chattels in the house to be rented.
If the tenant is to use the goods or chattels set forth in the
description prepared pursuant to sub-section (1), he/she has to receive
such goods or chattels and give a receipt thereof to the house owner.
407. Obligation of house owner: The obligations of the house owner shall
be as follows:
To allow the tenant to use the house in accordance with the
agreement,
To arrange for such water and electricity supply, sewerage and
sanitation in the rented house as may be required, except as
otherwise provided for in the agreement,
To prevent the tenant from insecurity, harassment or unrest
from other persons dwelling in the house,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
408. Obligation of tenant: The obligations of the tenant shall be as
follows:
To pay the rent to the house owner within the specified period,
To maintain sanitation in, and take care of, protect and
safeguard, the house rented as if it were his/her own,
Not to do any act such a causing unrest, harassment or
insecurity to the other dwellers in the house or neighbors,
To abide by the other matters set forth in the agreement.
409. Mode and procedures of payment of rent: (1) The tenant has to pay
the rent to the house owner in accordance with the mode and
procedures set forth in the agreement.
If the agreement does not provide for the mode and
procedures of the payment of rent pursuant to sub-section (1), the
tenant shall pay the rent to the house owner within seven days of the
expiry of each month.
The rent may be paid by way of cheque or in cash
pursuant to sub-section (2).
If the owner has received the rent in cash pursuant to this
Section, he/she has to give a receipt thereof to the tenant.
410. Obligation to pay tax and other charge: (1) Except as otherwise set
forth in the agreement, it shall be the obligation of the land owner to
pay the tax and other charge leviable by law in relation to the house
rented.
If it is the obligation of the land owner to pay tax or
charge pursuant to sub-section (1) and the land owner fails to pay the
tax or charge in time, the tenant may pay such tax or charge.
If the tenant pays the tax or charge pursuant to subsection (2), he/she shall be entitled to deduct such amount from the
rent payable to the land owner.
411. Insurance of house to be made: (1) A tenant who rents a house for
industrial or business purpose has to procure the insurance of the
house for its security.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"industrial or business purpose" means the operation of an industry or
carrying on a business or trade by a departmental store or one or more
than one shop.
If the person obliged to procure insurance pursuant to
sub-section (1) fails to procure insurance of the house and the house is
damaged by such cause as natural calamity, unrest, riot or fire, the
tenant shall be liable for such damage.
412. Repair and maintenance of house rented: (1) Except as otherwise
set forth in the agreement, the tenant shall be obliged to repair and
maintain the house rented, as required.
If the agreement provides that the land owner is obliged
to repair and maintain the house rented and it is necessary to carry out
any repair and maintenance of the house, the tenant shall give a notice
in writing to the land owner in time.
If the land owner fails to repair and maintain the house
rented despite the notice given pursuant to sub-section (2), the tenant
himself or herself may repair and maintain such house.
The tenant shall be entitled to deduct the amount of
expenses incurred in the repair and maintenance carried out pursuant
to sub-section (3) from the rent payable to the land owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the land owner shall not be bound to pay such expenses incurred in
the repair and maintenance of the house as may be unusual or
unnecessary.
413. Subletting house rented to other person: (1) If the agreement
entered into with the land owner provides that the tenant may sublet
the whole or any portion of the house rented by him/her to another
person, the tenant may, subject to the agreement, sublet the whole or
any portion of such house to another person.
If the tenant sublets the whole or any portion of the house
rented to another person pursuant to sub-section (1), the tenant shall
give information in writing indicating the name and address of the
sub-tenant to the house owner within fifteen days.
A sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to sub-section
(1) has to pay the rent of the house or its portion to the tenant who has
so sublet.
The sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) shall, while dwelling in the rented house, abide by all such
terms and provisions as required to be abided by the tenant pursuant to
this Chapter.
If the sub-tenant who rents the house pursuant to subsection (1) fails to act in accordance with the terms while dwelling in
the rented house or fails to maintain sanitation in the house or fails to
protect or safeguard it or carries out any act such as causing
harassment, pain or unrest to the other dwellers of the house or
neighbors, the tenant or the house owner may evict the sub-tenant
from the house at any time.
414. Prohibition on alteration in structure without consent: (1) Except
as otherwise provided for in the agreement, the tenant shall not be
allowed to demolish, remove or disorder any structure of the house
rented or add any part to the house or otherwise alter it without the
house owner's consent in writing.
If the tenant does any act in contravention of sub-section
(1) and causes any loss to the house owner, then the house owner shall
be entitled to compensation for the loss caused to him/her from the
tenant.
415. Prohibition on the use of house contrary to agreement: The tenant
shall not be allowed to use the house for any purpose other than that
for which he/she has rented the house, without prior consent of the
house owner.
416. Alteration in agreement: The house owner and the tenant may with
mutual consent make necessary alteration in the house rent agreement.
Provided that if such agreement is registered pursuant to this
Code, alteration has to be made upon making an application to the
concerned body.
417. Power to inspect: (1) The house owner may, by an advance notice to
the tenant, inspect the rented house from time to time.
If the house owner intends to inspect the rented house
pursuant to sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the tenant to allow
the house owner to inspect the house.
418. Leaving rented house: (1) A tenant may leave the rented house prior
to the expiration of the period of rent in the following circumstance:
If the house owner fails to perform his/her duties
pursuant to Section 407,
If the tenant does not require the house for the purpose
for which he/she has rented the house, or
If the house owner commits any act in contravention of
the agreement or this Chapter.
If the tenant has to leave the house in the circumstance
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1), except as otherwise
provided for in the agreement, the tenant has to give a notice in
writing to the house owner in advance of at least thirty five days.
If the tenant leaves the house without giving a notice
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house owner shall be entitled to deduct
the rent for that period from the rent, if any, paid in advance by the
tenant and to recover the same from the tenant, failing such advance
payment.
419. Power to evict tenant: (1) The house owner may evict the tenant
from the house in the following circumstance:
If the tenant fails to perform his/her duties pursuant to

Section 408,
If the tenant commits within the rented house any offense
related activity prohibited by law,
If the house owner needs the house for himself or herself,
If it is necessary to repair and maintain the house by
removing inhabitants from the house,
If it is not appropriate for human habitation in the rented
house from technical and health perspectives,
If the period of house rent expires,
If the tenant commits any act in contravention of the
agreement or this Chapter, or
If the circumstance as referred to in sub-section (5) of

Section 413.
If it is necessary to evict the tenant from the house in the
circumstance referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the land
owner has to give a notice in writing to the tenant in advance of at
least thirty five days.
If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house
pursuant to sub-section (2), the house owner is not entitled to rent
such house to another person before three months, without using the
same on his/her own.
If the house owner is to rent such house to another person
pursuant to sub-section (3) and the previous tenant intends to rent
such house, he/she shall get priority.
420. House rent agreement deemed to be terminated: A house rent
agreement entered into pursuant to Section 404 shall be deemed to be
terminated in the following circumstance:
If the tenant leaves the house,
If the house owner evicts the tenant from the house,
If the house owner and the tenant cancel the agreement with
mutual consent, or
If the period of house rent expires.
421. Obligation to hand over goods or chattels in good condition: (1)
The tenant shall, while leaving the rented house, count the goods or
chattels in his/her custody and clean and color the house, if required,
and hand over the same in good condition to the house owner.
If the tenant looses or damages any goods or chattels in
his/her custody, the tenant has to hand over similar goods or chattels
or pay a sum of money as per the prevailing price of such goods or
chattels to the house owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
the tenant shall not be bound to reimburse for such goods or chattels
which are depreciable or destroyable in the course of daily use or to
pay price of such goods or chattels.
422. Power to rent house to another person: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a tenant disappears
without paying the rent for three months or more without notice and
the tenant is not found despite a public notice or correspondence with
his/her address or the tenant or his/her heir or agent does not show up
despite that he/she has been found, the house owner may count the
belongings of the tenant and hand over the custody of such belongings
to himself or herself or another person, in witness of a representative
of the Local Body, police employee and two local gentlepersons if
such employee is not available, and rent such house to another person.
If the tenant who has disappeared as mentioned in subsection (1) shows up or send his/her agent within six months, the
house owner shall collect the remaining rent and return such
belongings to the tenant.
If the tenant does not show up or send any agent even
within the time limit referred to in sub-section (2), the house owner
may, by giving information to the Local Body and the nearest police
employee, exclusively deal with such belongings.
423. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months
from the date of commission of such an act.

Chapter-10
Provisions Concerning Donation and Gift
424. Donation or gift deemed to be effected: (1) Provision gratuitously
by a person of a property in which the person has title and ownership
to another person or organization for any religious, social, public or
community purpose or for the benefit of any person shall be deemed
to be a donation.
Provided that no donation may be made to the heir.
Provision gratuitously by a person of a property in which
the person has title and ownership to another person as a reward or
prize in consideration on account of merits to him/her by other person
by way of fostering him/her or otherwise or for family love and
affection shall be deemed to be a gift.
425. Prohibition on donating or gifting other's property: No person
shall donate or gift a property in which another person has title and
ownership.
426. Prohibition on donation or gift in duplication: No one shall donate
or gift the same property to another person that one has already
donated or gifted to someone else.
In the event of execution of donation or gift by one in
duplication in contravention of sub-section (1), in the case of the
donation or gift of an immovable property, the latter donation or gift
shall not be legally valid, and in the case of the donation or gift of a
movable property, the donation or gift to one who obtains the property
earlier shall be valid.
427. Donation or gift within immediate or testamentary effect: A
person may donate or gift his/her property to another person, with the
immediate or testamentary effect.
428. Execution of donation or gift jointly: (1) A person may donate or
gift his/her property jointly to more than one person or organization.
If a person donates or gifts his/her property jointly to
more than one person or organization, the receivers of such donation
or gift shall be deemed to have received the donation or gift in
proportion to that received by them each.
In the absence of a deed on donation or gift specifying
the portion of entitlement of receivers to the donated or gifted
property, all receivers of donation or gift shall be deemed to have
equal share in such donation or gift.
429. Person competent to make donation or gift: (1) A person who is
competent to enter into a contract and has the power to transfer a
property may donate or gift his/her property.
The competency of a person to enter into a contract
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be determined as of the time of the
making of donation or gift of a property.
430. Guardian not entitled to make donation or gift: No guardian shall
be entitled to donate or gift the property of a person who is under
his/her guardianship or custody to any one, on behalf of that person.
431. Acceptance of donation or gift on behalf of incompetent and
quasi-competent person or unborn baby: The father, mother or
guardian may, on behalf of an incompetent and quasi-competent
person or unborn baby, accept a donation or gift of a property.
432. Execution of deed on donation or gift: In making a donation or gift
of one's property to another, one has to execute a deed to that effect in
accordance with law.
Provided that in donating or gifting cash or any movable
property not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees, such donation
or gift may be made orally instead of executing a deed.
433. Estoppel to be made on announcement to make donation: Where,
in a public ceremony organized for any purpose, one makes a deed or
public announcement to donate a certain amount or property for that
purpose, one shall be estopped from subsequently refusing to make
such donation.
434. Entitlement to compensation: If the receiver of donation or gift is
aggrieved by being unable to enjoy such property in consequence of
any act done pursuant to Section 425, 426 or 433, the receiver shall be
entitled to have a reasonable compensation from the person making
donation or gift.
Provided that if a person accepts the donation or gift of such
property despite the knowledge of the circumstance as referred to in

Section 425 or 426, the person shall not be entitled to compensation.
435. Donation or gift to be void: Any donation or gift made shall ipso
facto be void, in any of the following circumstances:
If the person or organization entitling to donation or gift
does not accept the donated or gifted property oneself or
through own agent,
If a property is donated or gifted to a person with
entitlement after testament and the receiver of donation
or gift dies before the person making such donation or
gift,
If a property is donated or gifted to an unborn baby and
the baby is not born alive.
436. Power to have donation or gift voided: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, one who donates or
gifts may cause the donation or gift to be void in any of the following
circumstances:
If he/she donates or gifts a property in which another
person has title and ownership,
If any property is donated or gifted without obtaining the
consent of another person where such consent is needed
pursuant to law,
If one who donates or gifts of any property is an
incompetent or quasi-competent person, or
If the donation or gift of any property is made without
fulfilling the legal requirements.
In the case of a donation or gift made without the consent
of another person pursuant to clause (b) of sub-section (1) where such
consent is required, the property shall be void to the extent of such
consent being not taken.
437. Right to revoke gift: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, one who gifts with testamentary effect may
revoke the gift at any time in any of the following circumstances:
If the receiver of gift commits or attempts to commit any
criminal offense against the person who gifts or his/her
family,
If the receiver of a gift makes a false allegation or
accusation against the person who gifts or his/her family,
If a deed of gift provides that the receiver of gift shall
perform any function, duty or liability and the receiver of
gift fails to perform such a function, duty or liability.
438. Application to be made for revocation of gift with testament: (1) If,
for any circumstance set forth in Section 437, a person intends to have
revocation of a gift with testament, the person shall have to make an
application, accompanied by the fee of one hundred rupees, to the
office where the deed of gift was executed.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office shall revoke the gift if, on necessary inquiry made
into whether the gift is liable to be revoked as per the application,
such gift appears to be revocable, and make entries thereof in the
records maintained in the office and give information thereof to the
receiver of gift within fifteen days.
439. Acquisition of right in property of donation or gift: The receiver
person or organization of donation or gift shall acquire the following
right in the property of donation or gift:
If the donation or gift is to be effective with testament of
the person who donates or gifts, after the death of such a
person who donates or gifts,
If the deed of donation or gift does not specify any time
for it to be effective, from the date of the execution of the
deed.
440. Limitation: Except as specified a limitation by this Chapter in
relation to file a complaint, a person who is aggrieved from any act
done pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of
following time limit after the date of the commission of that act:
Three months in the case of the matters set forth in

Section 433,
Within two years after the date of maturation of the right
of that person, in the case of acquisition of donation or
gift, and after the date of possession and enjoyment upon
maturing the right of the receiver on the matters of
donation or gift not allowed to be made.

Chapter-11
Provisions Concerning Transfer and Acquisition of Property
441. Property deemed to be transferred: If a person sells or otherwise
transfers a property in which he/she has title or ownership to another
person, the property shall be deemed to have been transferred to that
person.
442. Right to transfer property with immediate or testamentary effect:
A person may, subject to this Chapter, transfer the title in his/her
property to another person within immediate or testamentary effect.
443. Ownership devolving on transferee of property: (1) In the event of
transfer by a person of his/her property to another person pursuant to

Section 442, his/her ownership in that property shall cease to exist
from the date of such transfer and the transferee shall have ownership
in such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a person transfers the right in his/her property to be effective
with testament, the transferee shall have ownership in such property
only after the death of the transferor.
444. Power to transfer personal property: A person may transfer his/her
personal property to another person without other's consent.
445. Power to transfer joint property: (1) A joint property may be
transferred with the consent of all owners of such property.
If all owners do not agree to transfer the joint property
pursuant to sub-section (1), any owner may transfer the property of
his/her right or portion.
If, in making a transfer pursuant to sub-section (1), it is
technically not possible to set aside the title or portion of any owner
from the joint property, and another owner intends to acquire such
property, he/she shall be entitled to acquire it at the price mutually
agreed upon between them.
If more than two or more owners intend to acquire the
joint property, the owner who agrees to pay the highest price shall be
entitled to acquire such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if
the other owners do not intend to acquire the title or portion of any
owner and it is not possible technically to set aside such property and
sell it, the whole of the joint property has to be sold and the proceeds
of sale divided between the owners according to their respective title
or portion in that property.
If a person transfers the joint property in contravention of
sub-section (1), only the transfer of the extent of his/her title or
portion in such property shall be valid; and the concerned person shall
be entitled to get return of the property transferred in excess of the
right or portion of the transferor.
446. Prohibition on transfer of property in common without consent:
(1) No person shall transfer a property in common to another person
without obtaining written consent of the coparceners.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the coparceners witness the deed of transfer of the property in
common, such coparceners shall be deemed to have given consent.
If a person transfers a property in common in
contravention of sub-section (1), the transfer of only the right or share
of such person in the property shall be valid. The concerned
coparcener shall be entitled to redeem the property transferred in
excess of the right or share of the transferor.
447. Power to transfer property in common for household purpose:
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 446, the head of house
may, for the household purpose, sell whole of the property in common,
in the case of a movable property, and the half of such property, in the
case of an immovable property, without consent of others.
448. Prohibition on transferring other's property: (1) No person shall
transfer a property in which another person has title and ownership.
In the event of transfer of a property by a person in
contravention of sub-section (1), such deed or transaction shall be
void.
If the real owner makes a claim in the property
transferred pursuant to sub-section (1), the transferee of such property
has to return it to the concerned owner.
If a person finds any lost or stolen property of another
person, the owner of such property may make a claim, accompanied
by the evidence of his/her ownership in that property, within three
years after the date when the property was so lost or stolen.
If any person claims such property pursuant to subsection (4), such property shall have to be returned to the owner by
collecting the expenses, if any, incurred in the protection and
maintenance of such property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
a person has acquired any stolen or lost property by way of purchase
at a public market or auction or Dutch auction made publicly by any
person or body, the person shall not be bound to return such property
to the real owner unless and until he/she obtains the real value of such
property and the fees or amount, if any, paid by him/her in the
acquisition of such property.
449. Prohibition on transfer of property in duplication: (1) No
person
shall re-transfer a property to another person which he/she has already
transferred to some other person.
In the event of transfer of a property by a person in
contravention of such-section (1), the deed of transfer executed at a
later date shall not be valid where an immovable property has been
transferred, and the earlier acquisition of property shall be valid where
a movable property has been transferred.
450. Entitlement to amount or compensation in event of deprivation of
enjoyment of property: (1)
If a person sells and transfers a
property pursuant to this Chapter and the purchaser is deprived of
enjoying the property wholly or partly because of such transfer being
invalid for any reason, the purchaser shall be entitled to recover the
amount paid by him/her for the property that he/she is so deprived of
enjoying, an interest to be set by yearly ten percent of the amount and
the registration fees or other amounts, if any, he/she has paid for the
transfer of that property as if it were an unsecured bond (Kapali).
If any person makes any structure in a property
purchased pursuant to this Chapter and is not able to enjoy that
property because of such transfer being invalid for any reason, that
person shall be entitled to demolish and take away the structure made
by him/her.
If any person is aggrieved in consequence of the transfer
of a property in contravention of Sections 446, 448 and 449 or failure
to demolish and take away any structure pursuant to sub-section (2),
such person shall also be entitled to a reasonable compensation of
actual loss from such transferor, in addition to the amount referred to
in sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3), the purchaser of property shall not be entitled to recover
the amount as set forth in those sub-sections in the following
circumstance:
If he/she has purchased the property despite the
knowledge that it was other’s property or a theft property,
If he/she has purchased the property despite the
knowledge that it was already transferred to any one else.
451. Person competent to transfer property: Any person except an
incompetent and quasi-competent person may, subject to this Chapter,
transfer a property in which he/she has right and ownership to another
person.
452. Right of guardian to transfer property: (1) A person may, subject
to this Chapter, transfer a property of an incompetent or quasicompetent person who is under his/her guardianship, for the right and
interest of that incompetent or quasi-competent person.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
guardian shall not purchase in the name of him/her or of his/her
relative any immovable property of an incompetent or quasicompetent person who is under his/her guardianship, except with the
order of court.
453. Power of attorney to transfer right in property: (1) If a person
appoints another person who is competent to be an attorney in
accordance with law as his/her authorized attorney indicating the
reason that he/she is not able to appear personally in the concerned
office in order to sell and transfer his/her immovable property, such an
authorized attorney may, on behalf of the donor of power of attorney,
sell and transfer the property of the donor to another person.
A person may sell his/her movable property through
his/her attorney or agent.
454. Procedures to be followed while purchasing and transferring
property by a body corporate: (1) If, in transferring an immovable
property held in the name of a body corporate established in
accordance with law, the board of directors of the body corporate
gives power by a decision to any member of the board of directors or
an employee of the body corporate to transfer the property, such a
person may transfer the property on behalf of the body corporate.
If the procedures referred to in sub-section (1) are
fulfilled while purchasing an immovable property in the name of any
body corporate, such person may purchase the property in the name of
the body corporate.
455. Purchase of property by other person in one’s behalf: (1) If, except
the circumstance set forth in Section 454, the purchaser of a property
in accordance with this Chapter is, for any reason, unable to appear
personally in the concerned office and gives a power of attorney,
accompanied by his/her citizenship certificate, to a person who is
competent to be an attorney by law in relation to the purchase of the
property, such attorney may purchase the property in the name of that
person.
456. Power to purchase property in the name of incompetent or quasicompetent person: A guardian may purchase any property in the
name of the incompetent or quasi-competent person under his/her
guardianship.
457. Procedures to be fulfilled in the event of transfer of right in
property in testament: (1) If a person transfers his/her title in a
property to another person with testamentary effect and such
transferor of property dies, one who acquires the property shall have
to make an application to the concerned office for the transmission of
the property to him/her, within six months after the date of the
transferor’s death.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office shall examine the deed maintained in it and make
necessary inquiry as to whether the deed executor has died or not and
the deed is void or not.
If, upon an inquiry made pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the transferor of property has died and has not got the
deed voided, such property has to be transmitted to the applicant.
If any person makes an application to the office for the
transmission after the expiration of the time limit as referred to in subsection (1), the office shall transmit the property to the applicant in
accordance with such a deed, by collecting the fees by five hundred
rupees for each year after the expiration of the time limit.
458. Not to claim for damage, destroy or low quality: A person who has
once purchased a property from another person shall not be entitled to
make a claim that such property is damaged, destroyed or low quality.
Provided that where the seller has sold the property by
misrepresentation or with deviation for the particulars set forth in the
deed, the purchaser shall be entitled to compensation for the same.
459. Exchange of immovable property: A person may exchange his/her
property with that of other person with or without adding any amount.
460. Restriction on transfer or mortgage of immovable property to
foreigner: (1) No person shall, without obtaining prior approval of
the Government of Nepal, transfer or mortgage any immovable
property to a foreigner.
If any person transfers or mortgages any immovable
property to a foreigner in contravention of sub-section (1), the
relevant deed shall, ipso facto, be void, and such a property shall
devolve on the Government of Nepal.
The amount invested by the creditor in the acquisition of
transfer or mortgage of the immovable property pursuant to subsection (1) shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond/money.
461. Transfer in the case of acquisition by foreigner of partition share
or inheritance: (1) If any foreigner obtains partition share or
inheritance in any immovable property within Nepal, the property
shall not be eligible to be transferred to or registered in the name of
him/her nor shall he/she be entitled to enjoy the income of that
property, except where so permitted by the Government of Nepal.
If any foreigner obtains any partition share or inheritance
pursuant to sub-section (1), such a foreigner shall have to transfer
such property to a citizen of Nepal in any manner.
In the event of failure to transfer the property of partition
share or inheritance obtained by a foreigner pursuant to sub-section
(1) to a citizen of Nepal pursuant to sub-section (2) within three years
of the acquisition of such partition or inheritance, the Government of
Nepal shall have right in such property after the expiration of that time
limit.
462. Deed to be executed: In transferring or exchanging an immovable
property pursuant to this Chapter, a deed shall have to be executed to
that effect.
463. Limitation: Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable, and in the other
cases, a person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of three months from the
date of knowledge of the commission of such an act.

Chapter-12
Provisions Concerning Mortgage of Immovable Property
464. Mortgage deemed to be created: (1) If a debtor gives the whole or
any portion of an immovable property in which the debtor has title,
ownership or possession to a creditor in consideration of a loan which
the debtor borrows from the creditor, by executing a deed entitling the
creditor to possess that property with effect from the date of execution
of the deed or after a certain period, such property shall be deemed to
be given in mortgage.
Where the deed provides that the creditor shall be entitled
to possess the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1) with
immediate effect at the time of lending or after a certain period, such a
mortgage shall be deemed to be usufructuary mortgage, and where the
deed provides that the creditor shall be entitled to possess the property
in the event of the debtor’s default to make repayment of the loan
within the deadline set by the creditor and the debtor for repayment,
such a mortgage shall be deemed to be a mortgage without possession.
A property to be mortgaged has to be of such nature as
may be capable of being enjoyed by the mortgagee.
A person shall not mortgage a property in which he/she
has not title, ownership or possession or which he/she will acquire in
the future.
465. Deed to be executed: (1) A deed has to be executed in accordance
with law for mortgaging any property pursuant to this Chapter.
A person executing the deed of mortgage has to be
competent in accordance with law.
466. Mortgaged property to be possessed and enjoyed: (1) The creditor
has to possess and enjoy the property in usufructuary mortgage from
the date of execution of the deed thereon or from a particular date, if
any, specified in the deed and the property in sight mortgage within
two years of the expiration of the date of repayment by the debtor.
If, for any reason, the creditor is not able to possess and
enjoy such property within the period referred to in sub-section (1) or
if the debtor does not allow, by any means, the creditor to possess and
enjoy it, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance with law for
an order enabling the possession and enjoyment of such property.
If the creditor fails to possess and enjoy the property
pursuant to sub-section (1) or to make a lawsuit for the possession and
enjoyment pursuant to sub-section (2), such mortgage shall ipso facto
be inoperative.
In the event that the deed of mortgage is inoperative
pursuant to sub-section (3), the deed shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond.
467. Possessory right in mortgaged property to be deemed as
transferred: If any person mortgages any property, the possessory
right in the property shall be deemed to have been transferred to the
creditor from the date of its possession and enjoyment by the creditor.
468. Entitlement to possess as if it belonged to oneself: (1) The creditor
shall be entitled to possess and enjoy the property mortgaged to
him/her and fruit, benefit and facility brought out from such property
as if the same were his/her own property.
If the creditor is not able to possess and enjoy the
property mortgaged to him/her in consequence of that property being
incapable of transfer or of any hindrance by the debtor, the debtor has
to pay a reasonable compensation to the creditor for the same.
469. Duty to take reasonable care of mortgaged property: (1) After
acquiring possessory right in the mortgaged property, the creditor
shall have to take a reasonable care and protection of that property as
if it were his/her own.
The creditor has to pay the tax or charge, if any, payable
by law for the possession and enjoyment of the mortgaged property.
Provided that the debtor has to pay the land revenue payable by
If the creditor is not allowed to possess and enjoy the
mortgaged property as a result of any obstruction by any person other
than the debtor, the creditor may make a lawsuit in accordance with
470. Prohibition
collecting
interest,
charge
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, no
creditor who has lent money against the security of usufructuray
mortgage in a property shall collect any kind of interest, charge or fee
in consideration of such loan from the debtor.
After the creditor acquires possession in the property of
mortgage without possession, the creditor shall collect any kind of
interest, charge or fee in consideration of such loan.
471. Period for possession and enjoyment of property in usufructuary
mortgage: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the mortgage deed,
no property in usufructurary mortgage shall be possessed and enjoyed
for a period exceeding ten years.
If the property in usufructurary mortgage is not taken
back within the period as referred to in sub-section (1), the deed of
mortgage shall be equivalent to an unsecured bond (kapali).
472. Maximum term of mortgage without possession: (1) No term of a
mortgage without possession in a property shall exceed five years.
No creditor shall be entitled to take action to have
possession in the property in mortgage without possession or to have
recovery of the related loan from the debtor prior to the completion of
the period referred to in sub-section (1).
After the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section
(1), the property may be possessed for a period not exceeding ten
years.
If the property given in usufructuary mortgage is not
redeemed within the period of ten years after the possession pursuant
to sub-section (3), the relevant deed shall be equivalent to an
unsecured bond (kapali).
473. Redemption of mortgaged property at any time: (1)
Except
otherwise provided for in the mortgage deed, the debtor shall be
entitled to redeem his/her property at any time from the creditor by
repaying the loan, in the case of a property given in usufructuray
mortgage, and the interest, if any, payable on the loan, in the case of a
property given in mortgage without possession, to the creditor.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the property in mortgage is a cultivable land and the creditor has
already planted crops in such land at the time of redemption, the
creditor shall be entitled to possess and enjoy such crops except as
otherwise agreed upon between the creditor and the debtor.
474. Remortgaging a property in mortgage: (1) A person who has
acquired a property in mortgage shall be entitled to remortgage such
property or any part thereof to another person in consideration for an
amount which is equivalent to, or lesser than, the amount mentioned
in the mortgage deed, and in such a case, a re-mortgage is deemed to
be created.
Provided that a mortgaged property shall not be the subject of
remortgage prior to the existence of the possessory right in such
property.
The term of possession and enjoyment of the remortgage
given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed the term of
possession and enjoyment under the mortgage.
If the debtor who has right and ownership in the property
intends to redeem the property remortgaged pursuant to sub-section
(1), the debtor shall be entitled to redeem the property upon payment
of the price/loan directly from the re-mortgagee if the price of the
remortgage is equivalent to the original price and through the
mortgage such price is less than the original one.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the transaction of remortgage made inconsistent with the
terms of the mortgage shall ipso facto be void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
If the creditor is not entitled to possess the property remortgaged pursuant to this Chapter, the deed of such remortgage shall
be equivalent to an unsecured bond (kapali).
475. Mortgaging benefits of property in mortgage: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 474, a creditor who has acquired a
property in mortgage may, instead of remortgaging the whole property,
remortgage only the fruits, benefit or facility of such property or any
crops, products, trees, bamboo trees, reaped or to be reaped fruits,
vegetables or any other kinds of products to be yielded or exploited
from such land.
476. Mortgaging by third party on behalf of debtor: (1) A third party
may, in consideration for a loan borrowed by debtor, mortgage a
property in which the third party has title, ownership or possession to
the creditor on behalf of the debtor.
The creditor shall, pursuant to this Chapter, be entitled to
possess and enjoy the property mortgaged pursuant to sub-section (1)
as if it were the property mortgaged by the debtor to the creditor.
In the event that a property is mortgaged by a third party
pursuant to sub-section (1), the relationship between the debtor and
the third party shall be governed by the mortgage deed or other
separate contract, and failing such provision, it shall be equivalent to
an unsecured bond (kapali).
477. Property in mortgage to be indivisible: (1) A property mortgaged
by a debtor to a creditor shall remain indivisible notwithstanding the
creation of more than one creditor in virtue of the partition or
succession between the creditor’s coparceners or the division between
creditor’s partners, and the debtor shall not be entitled to redeem the
whole or any party of the mortgaged property until the loan borrowed
by the debtor is repaid in full in accordance with the mortgage deed.
If two or more debtors are created in virtue of the
partition, succession between the debtor’s coparceners or the division
between the debtor’s partners, the mortgaged property is not
redeemable until each debtor repays his/her respective portion of the
loan in full.
478. Liability of a creditor for loss and damage of property in
mortgage: (1) After the creation of the creditor’s possessory right in
the property in mortgage, the creditor shall be liable for any kind of
loss or damage, if any, caused to the property in mortgage.
In the event of any loss or damage to the property
in mortgage pursuant to sub-section (1), the creditor shall so maintain
such property, at his/her cost, as to restore it into its original form.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the creditor shall not be liable for any loss or damage caused to the
property in mortgage by a natural calamity, and the creditor has to
maintain such loss or damage with the consent of the debtor.
While redeeming the property in mortgage, the debtor
has also to pay the expenses incurred in the maintenance pursuant to
sub-section (3), in addition to the loan borrowed from the creditor.
479. Not to create trouble on property in mortgage: After the creation
of the possessory right in the property in mortgage, the creditor shall
not so trouble the debtor by saying that such property is inappropriate
or is more or less as to be inconsistent with the terms of the deed.
Provided that nothing shall bar the making of a claim for the
repayment of loan in accordance with the mortgage deed if the
creditor is not allowed to possess the property in mortgage for any
reason or if the property is held to be imperfect for any reason
whatsoever.
480. Prohibition on mortgage in duplication: (1) No property which has
already been mortgaged shall be mortgaged, in duplication, again to
other person.
If a person mortgages a property in duplication in
contravention of sub-section (1), the second deed shall ipso facto be
void.
In the case a deed becomes void pursuant to sub-section
(2), the amount of a creditor who knowingly executes a deed in
duplication shall lapse, and that of a creditor who executes it without
knowledge of duplication shall be equivalent to unsecured bond
(kapali).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, and the first deed
providing for any kind of mortgage and the second deed providing for
the transfer of title, the transferee shall be entitled to establish the title
by making repayment of loan in accordance with the first deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in the event of the execution of deeds in duplication, title is to
be established within a period of two years from the date of the first
deed providing for usufructuary mortgage and within the period of
two years from the date of entitlement to the possessory right if the
first deed provides for mortgage without possessory right.
In the event of failure to establish the title pursuant to
sub-section (5) the amount of the creditor shall be equivalent to
unsecured bond (kapali).
481. Limitation: Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable, and in the other
cases, a person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to this
Chapter may file a complaint within a period of one year after the date
of the commission of such act.

Chapter-13
Provisions Concerning Pre-emption of Immovable Property:
482. Pre-emption deemed to be made: Where a person transfers, in any
manner, an immovable property in which that person has title,
possession and ownership to another person and any one who is in
neighbor of such property redeems it in accordance with this Chapter,
pre-emption shall be deemed to be made.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “in
neighbor of” means a situation where one is dependent for ditch,
water supply, passage or exit on other’s house or land bordering one’s
house or land.
483. Entitlement of heir to pre-emption: (1) If a person sells his/her
immovable property, the heir in neighbor of such land shall be entitled
to pre-empt such property upon payment of the amount paid by the
buyer of that property as well as the fees incurred in the passage of
deed to the buyer.
If there are two or more heirs who intend to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1), then the nearest heir, and, where
such heirs are two or more, the heir in immediate neighbor, and,
where even such heirs are two or more, all heirs in equal proportion
shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
If the nearest heir does not pre-empt such property
pursuant to sub-section (2), the heir who is the nearest in order of
priority shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
484. Pre-emption by tenant: If there is no heir in neighbor of or even if
there is an heir, but he/she does not intend to make pre-emption
pursuant to Section 483, the tenant, if any, in such property in
accordance with law shall be entitled to pre-empt such property.
485. Pre-emption of sold house: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in Section 483, where there are different owners of the
different parts of same house and the owner of a part sells his/her part
to another person, the owner of another part may, if he/she intends to
pre-empt that part, preempt the house by paying the house on payment
of the amount paid by the buyer and the fees incurred in the
registration of the deed to the buyer. If the owner of such other part is
the heir, he/she shall get the first priority.
486. Pre-emption of house donated or gifted: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Sections 483, 484 or 485, if any person
relinquishes in any manner his/her title and donates or gifts the half
part of the same house or any portion thereof or a land occupied by or
appurtenant to the house and the donee has transferred the right in the
house or land in any manner to another person, the donor or his/her
heir residing in the same place may, if he/she so intends, pre-empt
such house or any portion thereof or the land occupied by or
appurtenant to the house upon payment of the amount of the price, if
any, set out.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in subsection (1), if a person gets a donation or gift of the half part or any
portion of the same house or the land accompanied by or appurtenant
to the house from another person and the Section and the donor or
gifter of such house or land donates or gifts the remaining part or
portion of that house or land to another person, the former donee or
giftee or his/her heir may preempt the remaining part or portion.
In making preemption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
the figure of price, if any, indicated in the donation or gift, and
amount equivalent to the prevailing market price, if such figure is not
so indicated, and the fees incurred in the registration of the deed have
to be paid to the creditor.
If, there are two or more heirs intending to make preemption pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the nearest heir, and the
most aggrieved heir, where even the nearest heirs are two or more,
shall be entitled to make pre-emption.
487. Pre-emption not to be allowed: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Sections 485 and 486, a house built under the
provision of joint housing or any part of such house shall not be
subject to pre-emption.
488. Payment of money by pre-emptor: (1) A person who makes preemption pursuant to this Chapter shall make a petition in the office
making registration of the relevant deed, and such petition has to be
accompanied by the price of the property to be pre-empted, if any,
indicated in the deed registered for the transfer of such property and
the fees charged in the registration of such deed.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
office making registration of deed shall hold the petitioner on
recognizance and summon the person obliged to allow preemption to
appear in the office, within seven days excluding the time required for
journey.
If the person obliged to allow preemption appears and
consents to preemption within the time limit as referred to in subsection (1), the office making registration deed shall effect preemption
by paying the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1).
If, despite that the person obliged to allow preemption
does not appear and consent to preemption within the time limit as
referred to in sub-section (1), it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office making registration of deed shall make decision to
effect pre-emption, and if it appears that pre-emption is not be made,
that office shall make decision not to effect pre-emption and give
information thereof to the petitioner.
If the person obliged to allow preemption does not appear
within the time limit as referred to in sub-section (1), and, after the
expiration of the time limit, if it appears from the received petition,
registered deed and records of the office that pre-emption is to be
effected, the office shall make decision to effect pre-emption and give
an execution slip to the person entitled to pre-emption to enjoy the
property to be pre-empted, and send a notice to the person obliged to
allow preemption to receive the amount of deposit made pursuant to
sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
the person obliged to allow preemption appears within the time limit
and shows the reason why pre-emption is not to be made, and it is
necessary to decide upon examination of evidence, the office shall
inform that the concerned person should make a lawsuit in the court
within thirty five days.
In returning the amount to the petitioner on holding that
pre-emption cannot be made pursuant to sub-section (4), two and half
percent of the amount deposited pursuant to sub-section (1) has to be
deducted.
If the person who has petitioned for pre-emption does not
intend subsequently to make pre-emption or fails to appear on the
appointed dates, the office shall punish that person with a fine of three
percent of the amount of deposit furnished by him/her and the amount
that remains after deducting that fine from the amount of deposit shall
be returned to him/her.
489. To update records upon pre-emption: If it is held by the concerned
office or court that pre-emption can be made, entries have to be made
and updated accordingly in the records of the pre-empted property
maintained in such office.
490. Limitation: A person who is aggrieved from any act done pursuant to
this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of thirty five days of
the date of knowledge within six months of the date of the registration
of deed.
Provided that a tenant may file a complaint within a period of
thirty five days after the date of expiration of the date within which
the landowner may make pre-emption.

Chapter-14
Provisions Concerning Registration of Deeds
491. Deed deemed to be registered: If any deed submitted by an person to
the concerned office for approval pursuant to this Chapter is approved
by such office, such deed shall be deemed to be approved for
registration.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“concerned office” means such an office as may be designated by the
Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
492. Deeds to be registered: (1) In making any of the following deeds, a
person has to get it approved for registration with the concerned
office:
A deed transferring the right in an immovable property in
any manner,
A deed on mortgage with usufructuray possession,
mortgage without usufructuray possession or re-mortgage,
A deed on donation or gift of immovable property in
testament,
A deed on exchange of immovable property,
A deed on partition or relinquishment of partition on
common property,
A deed on separation of board and bread or unification of
board and bread,
A deed on creation of a trust,
A deed on house renting with a monthly rent of more
than one hundred thousand rupees,
A deed on usufruct in an immovable property,
Such other deed required to be registered pursuant to this
Code or law.
If a person fails to have registered a deed which is
required to be registered pursuant to sub-section (1), such deed shall
not have legal recognition.
493. Voluntary registration of other deeds: (1) A person may, if he/she
so intends, have registered any deed other than that set forth in

Section 492.
If any person makes an application for the registration of
a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned office shall register
such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.
494. Registration of deed by a mission: (1)
If a person makes an
application to the concerned office for the registration of a deed by a
mission deputed by the office and it appears that such a deed can be
registered by that office, the chief of office or other employee deputed
by him/her shall, on deposit with the office of the fees chargeable for
such registration, visit the location referred by the applicant and
approve and register such deed by fulfilling the legal requirements.
If the deed is registered by a mission deputed pursuant to
sub-section (1), the office shall credit into revenue the deposit made
pursuant to that sub-section.
If, for any reason, the deed is not registered by a mission
deputed pursuant to sub-section (1), the applicant has to get refund of
the deposit within three months.
If the applicant fails to get refund of the deposit within
the time limit referred to in sub-section (3), the office shall credit such
deposit into revenue.
495. Registration of deeds from other districts: (1) If the parties to a
deed intend to get the deed registered in a district other than the
district in which they reside or the property is located, they have to
make an application, setting out the matter, to the concerned office of
that district.
If an application is made for the registration of a deed
pursuant to sub-section (1), such an office has to make necessary
inquiry into the matter and approve and register such deed by
fulfilling the legal requirements.
If a deed of immovable property is registered in another
district pursuant to sub-section (1), the office has to send a copy of the
registered deed to the relevant office of the concerned district.
496. Fees chargeable for registration of deeds: (1) Fees as specified by
law shall be charged for the registration of a deed.
Except where the law provides for the fees of registration
of a deed, fees shall be charged according to the amount set forth in
the deed dealing with transaction of money.
Provided that if the price of the immovable property
referred to in the deed is less than the minimum price specified by the
Government of Nepal, the fees shall be charged according to the price
specified by the Government of Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
in registering a deed in another district, there shall be charged
an additional fee by ten percent of the fees set forth in that sub-section.
497. Obligation to pay fees: The following person has to pay the
following fees chargeable for the registration of a deed:
In the case of a deed transferring a property or relating to
mortgage, the transferee or mortgagee,
In the case of a deed on partition or relinquishment of
partition share, separation of board and bread or
unification of board and bread, all co-parceners in equal
portion,
In the case of a deed on exchange of property, both
parties to the deed,
In the case of a deed on donation or gift in testament, the
donor,
In the case of a deed on house renting, the giver,
In the case of any other deed, both parties to the deed.
498. Provisions concerning payment of amount: If any amount is to be
paid and received by and to the parties to a deed according to the deed
intended to be registered, such payment may be effected either in
household or in presence of the concerned employee of the office or
by a good for payment cheque.
499. Transfer and transmission to be effected: (1) If any transfer and
transmission is to be effected in consequence of a deed registered, the
concerned office has to execute the transfer and transmission within
seven days of the date of registration of the deed.
If any transfer and transmission is to be made in the
records of another office according to the deed registered by one
office, the latter shall give a time limit of thirty five days to the
transferee, thereby informing him/her to go to the concerned office for
the transfer and transmission and also send the deed to the concerned
office.
On receipt of a deed sent by another district for the
transfer and transmission pursuant to sub-section (2), the concerned
office has to enter the matter into its records and effect transfer and
transmission according to the deed.
500. Deed registered on earlier date to be valid: In the event of
registration of more than one deed in relation to the same matter, the
deed registered on the earlier date shall be valid.
501. Limitation: (1) A person who is aggrieved from any act done
pursuant to this Chapter may file a complaint within a period of six
months from the date of commission of such an act.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where a deed is registered by an office of another area, a complaint
may be made within a period of six months from the date of receipt by
the concerned office of a copy of the registered deed.

Chapter-15
Provisions Concerning Transaction
502. Transaction deemed to be made: (1) If there is an exchange of any
amount or goods between two or more persons subject to any
condition, transaction shall be deemed to have been made between
them.
In the event of a transaction made pursuant to sub-section
(1), the receiver of amount or goods shall have to return the same to
the giver of amount or goods.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
“amount” includes the price of goods.
503. Equivalent to loan: If a person has a liability to give any amount or
goods to another person in any manner, such a liability shall be
equivalent to a loan borrowed by that person, and such a person shall
have to return such an amount or goods to the concerned person,
subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
504. Prohibition on transaction without a deed: No one shall carry on
transaction without executing a deed in accordance with law.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term “deed”
includes a document including a cheque, bill, voucher and receipt
evidencing a transaction.
505. Matters to be set out in a deed: In carrying on a transaction, the
following matters have to be set out according to the nature of
transaction:
Name, surname, age, address of each person involved in
transaction, and name of his/her father, mother, grandfather and grand-mother,
Provided that in the case of a married person, the
name of his/her husband or wife, as the case may be, has
also to be mentioned.
Reason for transaction,
Volume of transaction,
In the case of transaction of any goods, price of the goods,
In the case of exchange of any goods by way of
borrowing, loan or otherwise, the matter to that effect,
Details of the goods, if any, exchanged,
Date of repayment of money transacted,
Rate of interest, if any, payable on the transaction,
Matter that the creditor shall be entitled to recover the
amount involved in the transaction from the assets of the
borrower in the event of failure to repay such amount
within the specified time or to fulfill the other conditions
set forth in the deed,
Place where the deed is executed,
Date when the deed is executed,
Such other matters as required to be set out by the nature
of transaction.
506. Entitlement of creditor to interest from debtor: (1) If a deed on
transaction provides about the payment of interest, the creditor shall
be entitled to collect the interest from the debtor as set forth in the
deed.
The amount of interest which the creditor is entitled to
collect from the debtor pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not exceed
annual ten percent of the principal.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) does not
provide for the rate of interest but only provides for the payment of
interest, the creditor shall be entitled to collect interest from the debtor
at the rate of annual ten percent of the principal.
If the deed executed pursuant to sub-section (1) provides
for the payment of profit instead of interest but does not specify the
amount of such profit, the creditor shall be entitled to collect such
profit from the debtor as if it were interest.
507. Prohibition on collection of interest by creditor from debtor: If the
deed on transaction does not provide for the payment of interest, the
creditor shall not be entitled to collect interest from the debtor.
508. Prohibition on collection of compound interest: (1) The creditor
shall not be entitled to collect compound interest.
If any creditor collects compound interest from a debtor
in contravention of sub-section (1), such an interest shall be deducted
from the principal and shall be refunded if the principal has already
been repaid.
509. Prohibition on collection of interest in excess of principal:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
creditor shall not be entitled to charge interest in excess of the
principal.
510. Procedures to be followed in paying and charging principal and
interest: The following procedures shall be fulfilled in paying and
charging interest:
If the debtor repays the whole of the principal and interest, the
creditor has to sign and return the deed on transaction to the
debtor by tearing out the deed or indicating on its reverse side
that the loan has been repaid,
If the deed is not found at the time of repayment of the principal and
interest pursuant to clause (a), the creditor shall have to give the
debtor a receipt indicating the receipt of the particular amount
on the particular date,
In repaying some amount out of the principal and interest, the creditor
shall have to indicate on the reverse side of the deed how much
he/she has received from the debtor on which date, and get the
debtor to sign the deed and issue a separate receipt of amount
accordingly if the deed is not found immediately or it is not
with the creditor for the time being.
511. Interest accruable as of the recovery of amount: If the court passes
a judgment entitling the creditor to recover interest as well, the
creditor shall be entitle to the interest as of the date of recovery
according to the judgment.
512. Period of a deed executed on household: (1) The period of a deed
executed on household pursuant to this Chapter shall not exceed ten
years except as otherwise provided in the deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the debtor repays some of the principal or interest thereon to the
creditor or the term of a deed is extended for the repayment of
principal or interest within the period of ten years, the period of
another ten years shall be extended from the date of such repayment
of principal or interest or extension of the period, as the case may be.
513. Transaction carried on with incompetent or quasi-competent
person not to be recognized: A transaction carried on with an
incompetent or quasi-competent person shall not have legal
recognition.
514. Recovery not available from property in common: (1) If any
person carries on transaction with another person and the deed of such
transaction does not bear the signature of the head of family, the
creditor shall not be entitled to recover his/her amount from such
property until the debtor's right in the property in common is
established.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the head of family repays the amount, the creditor shall be entitled to
recover the same.
If any person is not able to recover the amount from the
debtor on the occurrence of the circumstance referred to in sub-section
(1), the creditor shall have to make a complaint against the debtor and
maintain his/her right within a period of ten years.
In the event of the maintenance of the right with the
debtor pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall be entitled to
recover his/her amount from the debtor pursuant to law after his/her
right in the property in common has been established.
The limitation for filling a complaint shall, for the
recovery of the amount pursuant to sub-section (4), commence from
the date of establishment of the debtor's right.
515. Exchange of movable property not allowed without consent: (1) A
major member in a common family is not entitled to exchange any
movable property in common without consent of the head of family.
Provided that the consent of the head of family shall not be
required to exchange one’s personal property.
If a person exchanges a movable property in
contravention of sub-section (1), the exchange of such property shall
not be valid if the head of family does not consent to such exchange.
If there is no consent of the head of family to the
exchange of movable property made in contravention of sub-section
(1), the property so exchanged can be taken within a period of thirty
five days.
516. Recovery of amount if transaction appears: Even though any
person does not execute a deed by fulfilling the procedures referred to
in this Chapter, if it appears from any deed, banking transaction,
cheque, voucher or book of account that transaction has been carried
on with any person, the court may, based on such a deed, banking
transaction, cheque, voucher or book of account, order the recovery of
such amount from the debtor to the complainant.
517. Procedures to be followed where a deed executed on household is
lost or destroyed due to natural calamities: (1) If a deed executed
on household is lost or destroyed due to natural calamities, the
creditor shall have to make an application, setting out the matter, to
the local body within a period of fifteen days from the date on which
such loss or natural calamities are occured.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
local body shall have to draw up a receipt setting out the matter and
issue a receipt, sealed with the stamp of the office, to the applicant.
If an application is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
local body shall have to summon the presence of the deed executor, if
he/she is alive, and of the nearest heir, if such executor is not alive,
within a period seven days, and cause a deed to be prepared as per the
original deed, if he/she so consents, and authenticate such a deed and
deliver it to the applicant.
If the deed executor does not consent to execute another
deed indicating that the deed has been lost or destroyed due to natural
calamities pursuant to sub-section (3), the creditor shall have to make
a complaint and maintain his/her right, showing the evidence of the
loss of a deed or destruction due to natural calamities within a period
of thirty five days of the expiry of that time limit.
518. To return Goods transacted in the event of imperfection: (1)
Except as otherwise provided for in the deed, if the receiver of
any goods transacted with specification of price is not able to possess
the goods due to the fact that the goods do not correspond to that set
forth in the deed or are imperfect, he/she shall have to give a notice
thereof to the giver of goods within a period of thirty five days of such
transaction.
If a notice is received from the receiver of goods
pursuant to sub-section (1) and his/her statement appears to be
reasonable, the exchange of goods shall have to be made if the giver
has similar other goods; and if the giver does not have such goods,
he/she shall have to get back his/her goods and cancel the deed
executed in relation to such transaction.
If the giver of goods refuses to exchange or to take back
the goods pursuant to sub-section (2), the receiver of goods shall be
entitled to make a complaint to have recover of an amount equivalent
to the price of such goods and a reasonable compensation from the
concerned person or get such transaction to be void.
519. To return goods in original condition: (1) If any person acquires or
borrows for any specific purpose any goods owned by another person
whether for rent or not or on any other terms and conditions, the
person shall, after the completion of the purpose, have to return the
goods that are the same in kind, quantity and quality as have been so
acquired or borrowed.
If the goods acquired or borrowed pursuant to subsection (1) are lost, broken, destroyed, out of order or otherwise
damaged, except as otherwise provided for in the deed, the person
who acquires or borrowers of the goods shall have to return similar
other goods to the owner or pay to the owner an amount equivalent to
the prevailing market price of such goods if similar other goods are
not available.
Except as otherwise provided in the deed in relation to
the return of goods or payment of rent for the same pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), such goods or rent have to be returned or paid to the
owner within a period of fifteen days after the completion of the
purpose for which the goods have been acquired or borrowed.
If the person who acquires or borrower the goods fails to
return or pay the goods or amount to the owner within the time limit
set forth in sub-section (3), the aggrieved person may make a
complaint for the recovery of the amount of such goods and a
reasonable compensation for the loss caused to him/her.
520. Limitation: (1) There shall be no limitation for filling a complaint in
the matter of transaction carried on with intent to misappropriate or
prejudice the wealth of an incompetent and quasi-competent person,
collection of interest on interest or provision of interest in excess of
ten percent.
Except as provided for in sub-section (1), a person who is
aggrieved by any act done in accordance with this Chapter may file a
complaint as follows from the date of commission of such an act:
Where this Chapter provides for a separate limitation for
filling a complaint, such provision shall be applicable,
Within a period of one year from the date of expiration of
the period, if any, specified in any deed, and failing such
a deed, or in the other cases, within a period of one year
from the occurrence of the cause of action.

Part 5
LAW CONCERNING
CONTRACT
OTHER OBLIGASIONS

Chapter-1
General Provisions Concerning Obligations
521. Obligation to Arise: (1) In case there is a compulsion in law to
carry out or forbear to carry out any act, an obligation arises if
one does not carry out or does carry out such act.
(2) The obligation to be created pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall
arise and be maintained and determined under this Chapter.
522. Circumstances on which obligation is created: (1) The
obligation referred to in Section 1 shall be created and
maintained as follows:-
(a) By a law;
(b) By a contract;
(c) By an indirect contract or a quasi-contract;
(d) By an unjust enrichment;
(e) By a unilateral commitment of any person to assume an
obligation;
(f) By an act to be treated as tort under law;
(g) By an act to be treated as a quasi-tort under law.
(2) In regard to sub-Section (1),-
a) The obligation referred to in clause (a) shall be created
under this Code or other laws.
b) The obligation referred to in clause (b) shall be created
under a contact entered into between the parties.
c) The obligation referred to in clause (c) shall be created
under an indirect or a quasi-contact as defined in Chapter
15 of this Part.
d) The obligation referred to in clause (d) shall be created
under an unjust enrichment as defined in Chapter 16 of
this Part.
e) The obligation referred to in clause (e) shall be determined
under provision for creating an obligation under the law
through a unilateral commitment.
f) The obligation referred to in clause (f) shall be created
under the tort as defined in Chapter 17 of this Part.
g) The obligation referred to in clause (g) shall be created
from the defective product as defined in Chapter 18 of this
Part or from other act to be deemed as quasi-tort according
to law.
523. Obligation to be fulfilled: (1) While fulfilling an obligation,
the obligation of a matter which has been created or maintained
as to be fulfilled by a person or the person who has undertaken
to fulfill an obligation, such a person shall have to fulfill the
obligation of such a matter.
(2) In case the person who has to fulfill an obligation pursuant
to sub-Section(1) dies or becomes an insane, the successor who
succeeds his/her property shall have to fulfill such an obligation.
524. Obligation to be fulfilled within the prescribed time: (1) If a
fixed duration has been specified for fulfilling any obligation,
the obligation shall be fulfilled within the same duration.
(2) If a particular day or duration has been specified for
fulfilling any obligation, the obligation shall be fulfilled on the
same day or within the same duration.
Provided that if there is a stipulation that the obligation shall be
fulfilled within certain day or duration, the obligation may be
fulfilled even prior to such day or duration as well.
(3) In case no day or duration has been specified as referred to
in sub-Section (1) or (2), the duration, day or time to fulfill the
obligation shall be determined on the basis of nature of the
obligation and the obligation shall be fulfilled within a
reasonable time.
(4) In case no obligation is fulfilled pursuant to sub-Section (1),
(2) or (3), it shall be deemed that the person who has required
fulfilling the obligation has not fulfilled or could not be fulfilled.
525. Each of obligators has to fulfill obligation: (1) In case more
than one person have undertaken to fulfill an obligation or such
obligation has been created in his case, unless provided
otherwise, each of them has to fulfill the obligation equally.
(2) In case of a stipulation that a person has to fulfill an
obligation towards more than one person, unless provided
otherwise, the obligation towards each of them has to be
fulfilled equally.
526. Obligation may be divisible: (1) In cases where an obligation
has to be fulfilled towards more than one persons or more than
one persons have to fulfill an obligation, if the obligation
towards such persons or to be fulfilled by such persons could be
divided or fragmented having regard to its nature, such an
obligation may be divided and every person shall have to fulfill
the obligation or the obligation towards every person shall be
fulfilled accordingly.
(2) In the cases referred to in sub-Section (1), each person or
all persons may require to get the obligation fulfilled from each
or all persons requiring to fulfill such an obligation.
527. Obligation to be fulfilled in good faith: The obligation created
pursuant to Section 522 shall have to be fulfilled in good faith
by the person who has to fulfill it.
528. Compensation to be borne if no obligation has been fulfilled:
(1) In case the person required to fulfill an obligation makes
delay to fulfill obligation and thereby a loss is incurred to any
other persons in any manner whatsoever, such a person shall
have to bear compensation for the actual loss so caused.
(2) In case the person required to fulfill an obligation does not
fulfill it by fraud and a loss is incurred thereby, he/she shall be
liable to pay compensation for the loss so caused.
529 Obligation
contrary
fulfilled:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
if fulfillment of an obligation would be contrary to a law, public
order or public morality, such an obligation shall not need to be
fulfilled.
530. Impossible Obligation not to be fulfilled: (1) If, at the time of
occurrence of an obligation, the obligation of impossible nature
that could not be fulfilled has been arisen, such an obligation
shall not need to be fulfilled.
(2) If an obligation was, at the time of its occurrence, possible to
be fulfilled, however, it becomes subsequently impossible to be
fulfilled, the consequence of such obligation shall be determined
according to the law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) or
(2), if a portion of an obligation could be fulfilled and the rest
portion could be fulfilled, the obligation shall be fulfilled to the
extent it could be fulfilled.
531. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of one year from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-2
Provisions Concerning Formation of a Contract
532. Contract is deemed to be concluded: (1) In case an agreement
enforceable by law is concluded between two or more persons to
do or forbear to do any act, it shall be deemed to be a contract.
(2) For the purpose of sub-Section (1), a Contract shall be
deemed to have been concluded once the person to whom an
offer has been made by another person communicates his/her
acceptance.
(3) Once a contract is concluded, a binding legal relationship
shall be created between the parties to it.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) “Offer” means an offer made by one person to another
person with the intent of obtaining his/her acceptance
to do or forbear to do any act.
(b) “Acceptance” means the acceptance given by the
person to whom the offer has been made in the same
meaning in which the offer is made.
533. A Contract Enforceable by Law: (1) A contract concluded
having fulfilled the following conditions shall be deemed to be a
contract enforceable according to law:-
(a) The consent expressed by a person to a contract to bind
him/herself;
(b) Capacity or qualification of a party to a contract to
conclude a contract;
(c) Certain matter for creation of an obligation; and
(d) Lawful obligation.
(2) A contract may be concluded in written or verbal form or by
conduct of the parties concluding the contract.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in case
there is a requirement for conclusion of any particular contract
having completed particular procedure or formality, the contract
having not completed such procedures or formality may not be
enforceable.
534. Person Competent to Conclude a Contract: (1) Every person
other than the ones referred to herein below shall be competent for
concluding a contract:-
(a) One who has not attained the age of eighteen years,
(b) One who is of unsound mind.
Explanation:
(1) A person who is usually of unsound mind, but
occasionally of sound mind, may conclude a contract when
he is of sound mind.
(2) A person who is usually of sound mind, but
occasionally of unsound mind, may not conclude a
contract when he is of unsound mind.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), any
person not competent to enter into a particular contract under the
law in force shall not be deemed to be a competent person to
conclude such a contract.
(3) While entering into a contract on behalf of the person who is
not competent to conclude a contract, his/her guardian may
conclude a contract.
(4) While entering into a contract on behalf of a legal person, it
shall be concluded by a decision of the director or directors who
is/are authorized for management and operation of the legal
person or by authority of such a director or directors, as the case
may be.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section,
in case there is a legal provision that even a person deemed to be
incompetent for concluding a particular type of contract under
this Chapter is competent to conclude a contract on such a matter,
such a person shall be deemed to be competent to conclude a
contract on such a matter.
535. Parties to be Autonomous: Subject to this Code, the parties to a
contract shall be free to choose the form and content of contract,
to determine the terms and conditions of the contract and the
nature of the remedy as well as to determine the measures for
resolving disputes arising out under the contract.
536. Offer and Acceptance deemed to be completed: (1) Once the
offeree comes to know about an offer, the act of making the offer
shall be deemed to have been completed.
(2) The act of giving acceptance shall be deemed to have been
completed, in case of the offerer, if the offerer receives the
acceptance forwarded by the offeree to the offerer having indicated
his/her acceptance to the offer, and in case of the offeree, if the
offerer comes to know that the offeree has accepted the offer.
(3) Even though there is no expression of acceptance to the offer
directly, in case the offeree abides by any terms referred to in the
offer by way of his/her conduct or accepts the advantage or service
referred to in the offer or indicates acceptance in any other manner,
the offeree shall be deemed to have accepted the offer.
(4) In case the offerer makes an offer having stipulated certain time
duration and specifies that the offer is regarded to have been
accepted if a notice of rejection of the offer is not sent within such
duration, and if the offeree does not send a notice of acceptance of
the offer within such duration, the said offer shall not be deemed to
have been accepted.
537. Offer or Acceptance may be revoked: (1) The offerer may
cancel his/her offer through a notice.
Provided that, in case the offerer has received from the offeree a
notice to the effect that he/she has approved the offer before
receiving a notice of the revocation of the offer, the offer shall
not be deemed to be revoked.
(2) The offeree may revoke his/her acceptance through a notice.
Provided that the acceptance shall not be revoked in case the
offerer has already received the notice of acceptance before
receiving the notice of revocation of the acceptance.
(3) The person who has sent a notice expressing his/her refusal of
the offer may again send a notice expressing his/her acceptance to
the offer.
Provided that, in case the notice of refusal out of the notices of
refusal or acceptance reaches first, the contract shall not be
deemed to have been formed and in case the notice of acceptance
reaches first, the contract shall be deemed to have been concluded.
(4) In case the notice referred to in sub-Section (1) has been sent
after sending the offer, the notice referred to in sub-Section (2)
has been sent after sending a notice of acceptance, or in case a
notice has been sent under sub-Section (3) after sending a notice
of refusal and the concerned person receives such notices at the
same time, the contract shall not be deemed to have been
concluded.
(5) In case the offeree sends an acceptance with conditions or
with alteration to the offer sent by the offeror, it shall be deemed
that the offeree offers as counter offer.
538. Offer to be deemed revoked: An offer shall be deemed to have
been revoked in any of the following circumstances: -
(a) In case the offerer proposes an offer with a condition that
notice of acceptance to the offer be given within a specified
period, and the offerer does not receive a notice of acceptance
by the offeree within that period;
(b) In case the period for sending a notice of acceptance as
referred to in clause (a) is not specified and the offeree has been
made does not furnish a notice of acceptance to the offerer
within a reasonable period;
(c) In case the offerer, after presenting the offer, dies or
becomes insane before receiving the acceptance;
(d) In case the offer is revoked as referred to in Section 537;
(e) In case the acceptance was given but the offeree dies or
becomes insane before he/she receives the acceptance.
(f) In case the offeree sends a counter offer as referred to in sub Section (5) of Section 537;
(g) In case an offer make a condition that the offeree has to do
any act or fulfill any condition before accepting the offer,
acceptance is made without doing such an act or fulfilling such a
condition.
539. A contract according to offer presented before the public in
general: (1) In case a person makes an offer publicly by means
of an advertisement that he/she will reward any person for doing
any act specified in the advertisement, and in case any person
does the act as specified in the advertisement, the advertiser
shall have to reward such a person as stated in the advertisement.
Provided that in case the person does such an act referred to in
the advertisement without having knowledge about such
advertisement, such a person shall not be entitled to the reward.
(2) In case the act referred to in sub-Section (2) is done by more
than one person, only the person who does the act first shall be
entitled to the reward.
Provided that, in case two or more persons do the work referred
to in the offer at the same time, all of them shall be entitled to
the equal share of the reward and in case the reward could not be
shared, the proceeds of the sale of the same shall be equally
divided among them.
(3) In case a specific period is prescribed to do the act according
to the advertisement published under sub-Section (1), the offer
made according to the advertisement shall be deemed to have
been revoked immediately after the expiry of that period.
(4) An offer made under sub-Section (2) may be revoked
through the same medium through which it was published.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (4), in
case anyone does the act referred to in the advertisement
published under sub-Section (1) before publication of the notice
of revocation of the offer, he/she shall be entitled to the reward
as referred to in the advertisement.
Provided that, the person who does the act as referred to in the
advertisement shall have to notify the advertiser about the
completion of the act as soon as possible.
(6) In case any person begins to do the act according to the
advertisement published under sub-Section (1) having furnished
notification thereof to the advertiser, the person does the act in
such a manner shall be paid an appropriate remuneration for the
act done by him/her until the revocation of the advertisement.
540. Place of Formation of Contract: (1) The place where the
offerer sends an offer expecting to receive acceptance shall be
deemed to be the place where the contract is formed.
(2) In case the place is not specified under sub-Section (1), the
place where the offerer receives acceptance shall be deemed to
be the place where the contract is formed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Sections (1) and
(2), in case the parties specify the place of formation of the
contract in the contract itself, such a place shall be regarded as
the place of formation of the contract.
541. Contingent Contract: (1) In case a contract is concluded to do
or forbear to do any act if any event happens in the future, such
a contract shall not create any obligation until such an event
happens.
(2) In case a contract is concluded on the condition that the
contract shall be deemed to be concluded if any person does a
particular act, no obligation shall be created if such a person
does any act in such a manner as not to do or not to be able to do
any act.
(3) In case a contract is concluded on the condition to do or
forbear to do any uncertain event in the future, the obligation
under such a contract shall arise only after such an event
becomes impossible to happen.
(4) In case a contract is concluded to do or forbear to do any act
if any uncertain event does happen in the future, the contract
shall be deemed to have become void after becoming the
happening of that event impossible within the specified period or
after the expiring of the specified period.
(5) In case a contract is concluded on the condition to do or
forbear to do any act in case any event does not happen within a
specified period in the future, the obligation according to the
contract shall arise if such an event does not happen within such
a period or it is certain that such an event shall not happen
within such a period.
542. General provisions of Contract to Apply: The provisions of
this Chapter and Chapters 3, 4 and 5 of this Part shall, normally,
be applicable with regard to a contract or to other contracts to be
concluded according to this Code or a law.
543. Interpretation of Contract: (1) Interpretation of a contract
shall be made according to the common intention of its parties.
(2) In case the intention referred to in sub-Section (1) could not
be established, a contract shall be interpretated according to the
meaning of general understanding that a reasonable person of
the same prudence as a party to the contract would give to it in
normal circumstance.
(3) In case a party of a contract knows or is informed about a
statement or conduct of another party of the contract, the
contract shall be interpretated according to the intention of such
party.
(4) Interpretation of terms and expressions used in a contract
shall be made in the light of the entire contract or the context of
the statement in which such terms and expressions have been
used.
(5) A contract shall be interpretated so as to giving effect to all
the terms used in a contract and it shall not be interpretated
giving effect to deprive some terms from other terms.
544. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action has been occurred.

Chapter - 3
Validity of Contracts
545. Void Contract: (1) A contract which is not valid according to
law shall be deemed to be a void contract.
(2) The following contracts shall be void:-
(a) A contract that restraints anyone from exercising any
profession, trade or business which is not prohibited by a
Provided that a contract shall not be deemed to have been
concluded restraining from exercising any profession,
trade or business in any of the following circumstances:-
(1) In case a contract is concluded between the buyer
and the seller on selling and buying of the goodwill
of any trade, the contract prohibiting the seller from
carrying out a trade or business under such goodwill
at the time and place as referred to in such contract;
(2) A contract concluded among partners to restrain
their involvement in any profession, trade or
business, other than those of the partnership firm,
similar to those of the partnership firm or any other
profession, trade or business together with other
competitors belonging to the same type of profession,
trade or business so long as the partnership exists.
(3) A contract concluded among the partners in
restraining them from exercising a profession, trade
or business under the partnership firm for the
specified time or place after being separated from
the partnership;
(4) A contract restraining any individual from
receiving the service of any such an agency,
company, firm, individual or competitor of such
agency, company, firm, or individual for the
specified period of time after the retirement from
service or during the service of such an agency,
company, firm or individual pursuant to a contract
concluded by any individual with any such agency,
company, firm or individual.
(b) A contract restraining a marriage other than those
prohibited by the law;
(c) A contract restraining any one from enjoying the
facilities already being enjoyed by the general public;
(d) A contract restraining legal rights of any person from
being enforced by a court;
(e) A contract concluded on a matter contrary to or
prohibited by the law in force;
(f) A contract concluded for immoral purpose or against
public order or public interest;
(g) A contract which cannot be performed because the
parties thereto do not exactly ascertain or know about the
matter in relation to which it has been concluded;
(h) A contract which is impossible to fulfill at the time of
its conclusion or a fictitious contract;
(i) A contract the subject matter of which does not give a
reasonable meaning and is vague;
(j) A contract concluded by a person who is not competent
to conclude a contract;
(k) A contract that has an illegal purpose
(l) A contract concluded by mistake of both parties as to
the essential fact of the contract at the time of conclusion
of contract.
(3) A void contract is invalid from the very beginning and it
shall not create any legal consequence and rights and obligations
of the parties.
(4) In case any part of the contract becomes void, remaining
parts of the contract shall be enforceable according to law.
546. Voidable Contracts: (1) A contract which, at initiation of the
party to the contract, may be declared to be void by the court,
shall be deemed to be a voidable contract.
(2) The person aggrieved by any of following contracts may get
the contract declared to be void by a court:-
(a) A contract entered into by way of coercion;
Explanation: One is said to be subjected to coercion in cases
where property of such person has been detained or
threatened to detain or where he/she is threatened to put
his/her body, life or prestige in peril or where any other act
against law has been committed or threatened to commit
against him/her with an intention of causing him/her to enter
into a contract.
(b) A contract entered into by way of undue influence;
Explanation: (1) Influence exercised over a person who is in
one’s influence or who may be employed in work according
to one’s will with the intention of taking any unfair
advantage for the purpose of one’s concerns or interests shall
be regarded as undue influence.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of clause (1), any of
the following persons shall be regarded as persons who is
under one’s influence or who may be employed in works
according to one’s will:-
a) A person who is under one’s guardianship, protection
or responsibility;
b) A person who is incapable to represent his/her interests
for the time being or forever because of old age, illness
or physical or mental infirmity;
c) A person who may be subjected to financial or official
influence.
(b) A contract entered into by way of fraud
Explanation: A contract is said to be entered into by way of
fraud in cases where a party to a contract does, with the
intention to deceive the other party of the contract or his/her
agent, any act that is likely to create an assurance that any
matter, which he/she has the knowledge that the matter is not
true, is true; or though he/she has the information about a fact
but he/she knowingly conceals such fact or commits any
other act that is a fraud under the prevailing law.
(d) A contract entered into by way of misrepresentation;
Explanation: Any of the following acts shall be considered
as misrepresentation:-
1) Presentation of false description on any matter
without reasonable basis;
2) Caused emotional disturbance to any party to
his/her detriment;
3) Causing any mistake on any matter of the
contract;
4) Assured to have concluded a contract in one
matter and but caused to enter into a contract in
any other matter.
(3) In a case of a voidable contract under this Section, the
following matters shall be applied to the followings:-
(a) The party caused to enter into a contract may, instead of
making the contract to be void, demand his/her position to
be remained the same, as it was prior to conclusion of the
contract.
(b) Onus of proof of innocence or undue influence shall be
vested upon the party who claims that such a contract is
not concluded under an undue influence in case a contract
is concluded with the person who is under one's influence
and amenable to his/her wishes.
(4) A voidable contract shall, before it is declared to be void, be
enforceable as if it were a lawful contract.
(5) In case a voidable contract under this Section is declared to
be void by a court, it shall not affect on the act done before
the contract is declared to be void.
(6) In case any contract is declared to be void under this Section,
there shall be no adverse effect on a legitimate right or
interest of a third person merely because of such a contract is
declared to be void.
547. Unenforceable Contracts: (1) A contract that cannot be enforced
from a court shall be regarded as a unenforceable contract.
(2) The following contracts shall not be enforced from a court
even though they were concluded having followed the process
referred to in Chapter 2 of this Part:-
a) A contract required to be in written form according to
law is not concluded in written form;
b) A contract required to be concluded having fulfilled any
particular formality or procedure but not concluded
having fulfilled such formality or procedure;
c) In case a contract is entered into on behalf of another
person, a contract concluded on the matter not authorized
by such a person or beyond the limitation of such
authority
548. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case at any time in case of a contract to
be void and within a period of one year from the date on which
the cause of action arises in case of a voidable contract and in
case of other contracts, within a period of two years from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter4
Provisions Concerning Performance of Contracts
549. Obligation under contract to be fulfilled: Each party to a
contract shall have to fulfill his/her obligation under the contract.
550. Reciprocal performance of contract: (1) In case a contract is
concluded with a condition that both parties to the contract shall
have to fulfill their respective obligations simultaneously, and in
case either party demonstrates a conduct or intention of not
fulfilling his/her obligation materially, the other party may not
need to fulfill his/her promise.
(2) In case an order of priority concerning fulfillment of any
promise has been specified in the contract itself, it shall be
fulfilled accordingly, and in case no such an order of priority
has been specified, the party who is required to do so first
according to the nature of the contract shall have to fulfill it first.
(3) In a contract containing reciprocal promises, in case one
promise cannot be fulfilled without fulfilling another promise,
the party which cannot perform the contract because of the
failure of the other party to fulfill its promise may recover the
loss and damage caused by the failure of the other party to
perform the contract.
(4) In case a contract is concluded pursuant to sub-Section (1), if
any party restrains the other party rendering it to be unable to
perform the contract, the party which is unable to perform the
contract may initiate to get the contract revoked and also to
recover any loss suffered by him/her due to its revocation in that
manner.
551. Time and Manner for performance of a contract: (1) In case
time and manner for performance of a contract has been
stipulated in the contract, it shall be performed within the
stipulated time according to the specified manner.
(2) In case no time or manner for performance of the act under
the contract has been specified in the contract, however, the act
under the contract is such that it could be performed only at any
specific time or according to any specific manner, the contract
shall be deemed to have been concluded to perform the act at
that time and according to that manner.
(3) Except in the circumstances referred to in sub-Section (2), in
case the time and manner for performance of the contract has
not been referred to in the contract, the contract shall be
performed within a reasonable time having followed reasonable
manner.
552. Place for performance of a contract: (1) In case any particular
place has been specified in the contract for performance of any
act under the contract, such an act shall be performed at the
same place.
(2) In case any party has to hand over or deliver goods to the
other party under the contract and the place to hand over or
deliver the goods has not been specified in the contract, the
contract shall be deemed to have been concluded with a
condition that the goods has to be delivered or handed over at
the place where such goods are located.
(3) In case a particular place for performing an act has not been
stipulated in the contract, however, the act may be done only at
a specific place or it has to be done in any particular place
having regard to practice or usage or nature of the act, it shall be
deemed that the contract has been concluded to perform it in that
place.
(4) In the events other than those referred to in sub-sections (2)
and (3), in case the place for performance of the act is not
referred to in the contract, the party performing the act
according to the contract shall ask the other party to specify a
reasonable place for performing the act, and the other party shall
have to specify a reasonable place to perform the act.
553. Performance of Contract deemed to be delayed: (1) In case of
a contract concluded to perform at or within any particular time
has not been performed within such time, performance of
contract shall be deemed to have been delayed.
(2) In case the contract referred to in sub-Section (1) could be
performed even after such a period of time, either party of the
contract may notify the other party to perform the contract
having given a reasonable time.
(3) Upon giving a notice pursuant to sub-Section (2), the other
party shall have to perform the contract accordingly and may
claim for compensation for the loss caused due to the delayed
performance of the contract.
(4) In case the contract is not performed pursuant to sub-Section
(3), the party notifying in such manner may revoke the contract.
554. Time to be regarded as Essence of Contract: (1) In case the
purpose or objective of the contract cannot be achieved if the
contract is not performed within particular date, time or period
having regard to the nature of the contract or intention of the
parties to the contract, the time for performance of such a
contract shall be regarded as the essence of the contract.
(2) In case either party of the contract does not perform the
contract referred to in sub-Section (1) within such a date, time
or period, such a contract shall be deemed to be breached and
the other party may rescind the contract forthwith.
555. Circumstances in which contracts need not be performed: In
any of the following circumstances, there would be no need to
perform an act under the contract or to perform the contract:-
(a) In case either party to the contract absolves the other
party from fulfilling the obligations under the contract;
(b) In case a voidable contract is declared to be void by
the party concerned;
(c) In case the contract cannot be performed for the reason
of breach of the contract by the other party;
(d) In case it becomes not necessary to perform the act
referred to in the contract according to any provision of
this Part;
(e) In case of a contract which is unenforceable according
to Section 559.
556. Devolution of rights and obligation of contract: In case a
party to a contract dies or becomes insane, the rights accruing
from the contract shall devolve on the successor to his/her
property, and the successor shall also have to bear the obligation
to the extent covered by the property succeeded by him/her.
Provided that, the rights and obligation accruing on the basis of
personal skills and qualification shall not devolve on such
successor.
557 Transfer of Right or Obligation under Contract: (1) Except
in cases where a contract has to be performed by the person
entering into the contract, the contract may be performed by
his/her agent, or by a person appointed by him/her or any other
person on his/her behalf or right or obligation under the contract
may be transferred.
Provided that, no party to a contract may transfer the obligation
under the contract to any other person without consent of the
other party.
(2) The following terms and conditions shall be met in order to
transfer rights and obligation pursuant to sub-Section (1):-
Unless otherwise provided for in the contract,
the transfer shall be in written form;
The transfer shall be without any condition;
No law or the contract has prohibited the
transfer of rights and obligation;
In case of transfer of rights and obligation,
information thereof have to be provided to the
other party.
(3) Once a party accepts an act done by the third person, he/she
may not claim later on that the act has to be done by the party
entering into the contract, except otherwise provided for in the
contract.
(4) In case two or more persons jointly enter into a contract with
any other party, any of the persons or all persons jointly entering
into the contract shall fulfill or cause to be fulfilled the
obligation under the contract, except otherwise provided for in
the contract.
(5) In case any person has fulfilled the obligation under sub Section (4), the person so fulfilling the obligations may recover
compensation or loss on a pro rata basis from other persons
jointly entering into the contract.
(6) In the contract concluded pursuant to in sub-Section (4), in
case any party gives concession to any person belonging to the
other party from the obligation of his/her share, the other
persons shall not be free from the remaining obligation of the
contract.
558. Only the party to have right to perform the contract: (1) Only
the person who is a party to a contract may demand for
performance of the contract from other party.
Provided that in case the contract is concluded for the benefit of
any person, such a person may demand for the performance of
that contract even though he/she is not a party to such contract.
(2) In case two or more persons jointly promise to do or forbear
to do any act, all persons concluding the contract may demand
for performance of that contract, except otherwise provided for
in the contract.
559. Contracts need not be performed in the event of fundamental
changes in circumstances: (1) In case it becomes impossible to
perform a contract as a result of fundamental change in the
circumstances existed at the time of formation of the contract, the
act according to the contract need not be performed.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-Section (1),
emergence of any of the following circumstances shall be
deemed to have been occurred fundamental change in the
circumstance of formation of the contract:-
(a) In case the contract becomes illegal and thereby it
cannot be performed;
(b) In case it becomes not possible to perform the contract
due to emergence of the situations such as war, floods,
landslides, fire, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, which are
beyond human control;
(c) In case an element essential for performance of the
contract is destroyed or damaged, or exists no longer, or
such an element could not be obtained;
(d) In case of the contract concluded with a condition to
provide services on the basis of personal efficiency, skill
or talent, the person providing such service dies or
becomes insane or is incapable of performing the contract
because of physical or mental disability.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), none
of the following situations shall be deemed to be the
fundamental changes in the circumstance in the formation of the
contract:-
(a) In case it becomes difficult to perform the contract;
(b) In case profit margin is low or it causes loss;
(c) In case any party to the contract is dependent upon any
third party who is not a party to the main contract for
performing the contract and the third party commits a
default or becomes incompetent;
(d) In the event of strikes or lockouts;
(e) In case additional tax, fee or other revenue is required
to be paid;
(f) In case the contract is concluded with more than one
objective and some of them could not be fulfilled.
(4) In case of emergence of any of the circumstances referred to
in sub-Section (3), the parties may, except otherwise is provided
for in the contract, review or negotiate to alter the terms and
conditions of the contract.
(5) In case it becomes impossible to perform a contract because
of fundamental changes in the circumstances as referred to in
sub-Section (2), it shall be as follows in the following matters:-
(a) The amount paid by one party to the other prior to
occurrence of such change in the circumstances shall be
refunded to the other party.
(b) Payment to be made or due from one party to the other
according to the contract shall not payable after such a
change in the circumstance.
(c) In case any party has performed any act or paid any
amount before such a change in the circumstance, such act
or amount shall be calculated and the amount to be paid to
each other shall be determined, and reasonable expenses
incurred by one party according to the contract may be
recovered from the other party.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, the
parties to a contract may agree to fulfill their respective
obligations by continuing the performance of the contract after
the end of the circumstance referred to in clause (b) of sub Section (2).
560. Facilities to be provided: (1) The parties to a contract shall
have to provide facilities to each other that may be needed to
perform the contract from their respective sides.
(2) In case the contract could not be performed due to failure in
providing such facilities, the party failing to perform the
contract shall not be held responsible.
561. Contract may be suspended or altered: (1) In case the parties
to a contract agree, all or any of the portion of the act to be
performed under the contract may be changed or altered; the
time-limit for performing any act under the contract may be
extended; the contract may be suspended by not making it
obligatory to perform any act to be performed under the contract
for some time, the act referred to in the contract may be replaced
by another act, or a new contract may be signed as a substitution
of the original contract.
(2) In case any alteration or amendment is made in the contract
pursuant to Sub Section (1), a new contract shall be deemed to
have been signed, and the contract shall become effective
accordingly.
(3) In case a new contract is signed pursuant to sub-Section (2),
obligation under the initial contract need not be borne except as
otherwise provided for in the contract.
562. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter5
Provisions Concerning Breach of Contract and Remedies
563. Breach of Contract: (1) In case either party to a contract does
not fulfill the obligation under the contract, or gives a notice to
the other party that he/she will not perform the act to be
performed under the contract, or in case his/her action or
conduct shows that he/she is incapable of performing the act
under the contract, he shall be deemed to have breached the
contract.
(2) In case a party has breached the contract as referred to in
sub-Section (1), or in case his/her action or conduct shows that
he/she has not materially compiled with the contract, the other
party may revoke the contract by furnishing a notice thereof to
the other party.
(3) In case a contract has been revoked pursuant to sub-Section
(2), the party revoking the contract shall not be compelled to
comply with the contract.
564. Indivisible Nature of the Authority to Revoke Contract: In
case there are two or more persons in either party of a contract,
the contract may be revoked only if all of them revoke it or if it
is revoked in such a manner that revocation would be applicable
in case of all of them.
565. Compensation for Breach of Contract: (1) In case a contract is
breached pursuant to Section 1, the party aggrieved by it may
realize from the party who has breached the contract the actual
loss or damage suffered by him/her as a result of such breach of
contract or the loss or damage, which the contracting parties had
anticipated at the time of signing of the contract.
(2) In case any specific amount of compensation was estimated
in advance at the time of conclusion of the contract for breach of
the contract, the aggrieved party may be entitled to recover from
the other party a reasonable amount not exceeding that amount.
(3) In case the amount of compensation referred to in sub Section (2) has not been specified, the party making a claim for
such compensation may realize a reasonable amount for the
direct and actual loss or damage that has resulted from the
breach of contract.
Provided that no compensation may be recovered for any
indirect or hypothetical loss or damage.
(4) In case a contract has been concluded for completing any act
within a specific period, and in case provision has been made for
payment of compensation pursuant to sub-Section (1) for the
failure to complete that act within the specific period, the party
paying compensation may request for extension of the time for
completing the contract in proportion to the amount paid by
him/her as compensation.
(5) Payment of an amount of compensation itself shall not be
deemed to have caused adverse impact on the rights of the party
to seek other legal remedies.
566. Consequence of revocation or void of contract: (1) In cases
where a contract has been revoked upon mutual consent of both
parties after either party of the contract receives some cash or
kind or any other benefit from the other party or fulfillment of
the obligations under the contract partially or fully; in cases the
contract needs not to be performed under this Part or other laws
in force; in cases the contract is void according to a law or
declared to be void; in cases the contract becomes invalid or has
been revoked under this Part; such cash or kind shall be returned
having settled the accounts of the cash or kind given in such a
manner until the date of the contract being in force.
(2) In case any service or advantage other than cash or kind has
been given pursuant to sub-Section (1), the party receiving such
a service or advantage shall pay a reasonable amount to the
other party in lieu of such service or benefit.
Provided that no cash, kind or any other benefit received or
provided under the contract to be void pursuant to this Part shall
be recovered.
In case it becomes necessary to initiate legal action for not
returning the amount paid in cash or kind or non-payment of
amount under sub-Section (1), the concerned party may also
demand to recover reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose.
567. Quantum Meruit: In case any party breaches a contract or a
contract is discharged for any other reason, the aggrieved party
may claim for the payment in proportion to which he/she has
done the act or performed the contract.
568. Specific Performance of Contract: (1) In case the cash
compensation is not reasonable or adequate for the actual loss or
damage caused to the aggrieved party because of breach of a
contract, the aggrieved party may make a claim for specific
performance of the contract instead of making a claim for
compensation.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
claim of specific performance may not be made in any of the
following circumstances:-
In case the cash is adequate as compensation for
breach of a contract;
(b) In case the court cannot supervise whether the act to
be performed under the contract has actually been
performed;
In case the contract has been concluded for
providing services concerning personal expertise,
skill or knowledge;
(d) In
contract
cannot
specifically
performed;
In case the party in breach of the contract claims for
specific performance of the contract.
569. Court May Issue Order: (1) In case it becomes impossible to
perform a contract because either party of the contract is about
to take any action or conduct in a manner contrary to the nature
of the contract, the party aggrieved by such action or conduct
may file a complaint at the Appellate Court requiring for a stay
order to prohibit such action or conduct.
(2) In case a complaint is filled pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
court may issue an appropriate order to any party to immediately
stop his/her particular action or conduct with a provision to
settle the dispute resulting from that contract according to the
contract or prevailing law.
(3) In case such an order is issued, the aggrieved party may also
realize the additional loss or damage resulting from the failure
of the other party to comply with the order issued pursuant to
sub-Section (1).
570. Compensation to be ascertained in Monetary Value: Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, assessment of
compensation of the loss shall be ascertained in monetary value.
Provided that in case of remedy referred to in Section 568, it
shall be as stipulated therein.
571. Court May Consider: While determining compensation arising
out of the reason of breach of a contract, the court shall have to
consider
whether
party
breached
contract
intentionally or it could not be performed due to negligence of
the party and also the amount or benefit receivable by the non385
defaulter party to the contract had the contract not been
breached.
572. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-6
Provisions Concerning Sale of Goods Contracts
573. Contract Concerning Sale of Goods: (1) A contract concerning
sale of goods shall be deemed to have been concluded in case
any seller agrees to hand over immediately or in the future any
goods to the buyer having received a price.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any type of movable or immovable property that may be
purchased or sold except the currency in circulation, security, or
an actionable claim.
(2) A contract concerning sale of goods may be conditional or
unconditional.
(3) A contract may be concluded with a provision to sell goods
owned or possessed by the seller for the time being or those to
be produced or acquired by him/her in the future.
574. Contract concerning sale of goods to be void: In case a contract
has been concluded to sell particular goods, and in case the
goods have suffered any loss at the time of, or before concluding,
the contract and the seller had no knowledge thereon at the time
of concluding the contract, the contract shall be void.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, 'specific goods'
means the particular goods referred to in the contract at the time
of concluding the contract.
575. Fixation of price of goods: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the price of goods shall be fixed on the basis of the
terms and conditions of the contract or according to the
procedure agreed upon in the contract or in the process of
transaction between the parties.
(2) In case the price of goods has been fixed according to their
weight and measurement, the price of goods shall be fixed on
the basis of the net weight and measurement of the goods,
except otherwise provided for in the contract.
(3) In case the price of goods cannot be fixed under Subsection
(1) or (2), the buyer shall pay to the seller a reasonable price
taking into account the concerned circumstances.
576. Price of Goods to be Paid: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the price of goods must be paid as follows in the
following circumstances:-
At the time of purchase of goods by the buyer the
price of goods shall be paid to the seller; or
(b) At the time of transfer of the goods.
(2) While making payment of the price of the goods, it shall be
paid in cash.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, 'cash' also
includes cheques payable through a bank, traveler's cheques,
promissory notes, bills of exchange, letter of credit, bank draft,
credit card and telegraphic transfers as well.
577. Description of goods: (1) In case the name, brand, trademark or
specification of any goods to be sold are referred to in the
contract, the contract shall be deemed to have been concluded to
sell goods of the same name, brand, trade mark or specification.
(2) In case the name, brand, trademark or specification and
sample goods to be sold have been stipulated, the bulk of the
goods shall not be corresponding only to the sample but also to
the name, brand, trademark or specification as stipulated in the
contract.
578. Title to be deemed to the goods to be sold: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the seller shall be deemed to have a
title over the goods sold if it is sold, or over the goods to be sold,
if agreed to sell in future, and that such goods is or shall be free
from custody, control or procession of any person.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the seller shall
be deemed to have the right to sell the goods sold or to be sold
by him/her.
579. Goods to be deemed to be of satisfactory quality: (1) Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, goods sold or to be sold
shall be deemed to be of satisfactory quality.
(2) In case any particular goods sold or to be sold for any
particular purpose are appropriate for that purpose, they shall
be considered to be of, or are of, satisfactory quality.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in
case the defect of any goods has been stipulated in the
contract or the buyer has the information of the defect before
the contract is concluded or while inspecting the goods, the
goods shall not be deemed to be of unsatisfactory or inferior
quality.
(4) In case the quality of any particular goods has been
stipulated in the contract, it shall be according to the contract
and if not stipulated therein, the goods shall be of the quality
according to the prevalent standard.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the seller shall
not be deemed to have warranted that the goods sold or to be
sold is having a particular quality.
580. Substandard Goods may be accepted or rejected: (1) In case a
seller delivers to a buyer the goods of different quality than that
of stipulated in the contract, the buyer may accept such entire
goods, reject such entire goods or accept any part thereof and
reject rest of the goods.
(2) In case any goods has been rejected entirely or in part, the
buyer may inform the seller either to deliver another goods
instead of such goods or in case the quality of such goods could
be improved, to improve the quality of such goods.
(3) In case the information is given pursuant to sub-Section (2),
the seller shall, according to the information given by the buyer
or the mutual understanding developed between them, deliver
another goods instead of such goods or improve the quality of
the goods delivered.
581. Sale through Samples to be made: (1) In case provisions have
been made in a contract to sell goods upon inspection of their
samples directly or indirectly, it shall be deemed that the
contract has been concluded to sell goods upon inspecting the
samples.
(2) In case a contract has been concluded to sell goods upon
inspecting the sample, it shall be deemed to have included the
following conditions, except otherwise provided for in the
contract:
(a) The bulk of the goods shall correspond to the samples in
quality.
(b) The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity to compare
the quality of the bulk of the goods with the sample.
(c) The goods sold or to be sold shall be free from any defect,
and that their satisfactory quality shall be apparent while
inspecting them at the time of comparing them with the sample.
582. Provisions concerning transfer of ownership of goods: (1)In
case a contract has been concluded to sell any particular or
certain goods, the transfer of the goods shall be made as
provided for in the contract, and if not provided in the contract,
it shall be transferred according to the conditions of the contract,
the conduct of the parties, and the intention of the parties
expressed through the relevant circumstances.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case a
contract has been concluded in such a circumstance that any
particular goods could be delivered immediately, the parties
shall be deemed to have the intention of delivering them upon
concluding the contract or upon payment of the price of the
goods.
(3) In case a contract has been concluded in such a circumstance
that a particular goods may be delivered immediately, and in
case the buyer has to weigh, measure and examine the goods or
to do any act to determine their price, such goods shall not be
delivered until such acts have been done and information thereof
is given to the buyer within a reasonable time.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, a contract
shall be deemed to have been concluded with a provisions to
transfer the goods at the very place where the goods has been
sold or is to be sold.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the title or
ownership of the buyer shall be deemed to have been established
on the goods from the very moment the goods is transferred to
him/her.
583. Risk to be borne: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the
contract, the seller shall bear the risk of any loss or damage to
such goods until they are transferred to the buyer.
(2) In case there has been delay in transfer of goods due to the
buyer or the seller, the party who has caused such delay shall
bear the risk of loss or damage under sub-Section (1).
(3) In case the seller has agreed to deliver goods from the place
of purchase to the place specified by the buyer, the seller shall
bear the risk of any loss or damage to goods, except otherwise
provided for in the contract.
584. Buyer's right to inspect goods: Upon the sold goods are
delivered to the buyer; the buyer shall have a reasonable
opportunity to examine and ascertain whether or not the goods is
according to the contract and until the buyer ascertains in such a
manner, he/she shall not be deemed to have accepted the
delivery of the goods.
585. Goods deemed to be delivered: The buyer shall be deemed to
have received the goods in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) In case the buyer or his/her representative receives the
goods;
(b) In case a receipt or memo is issued having acknowledged the
delivery of the goods;
(c) In case the buyer inspects the goods and ascertains that they
conform the contract pursuant to Section 584, and
accordingly keeps them in his/her store;
(d) In case the goods reach to the buyer and are retained by
him/her, even if he does not send information about his/her
refusal to accept them within a reasonable time limit,
(e) In case he/she does anything to prove his/her ownership of
such goods.
586. Time-limit for delivering goods: (1) In case the contract
provides that goods must be delivered at any particular time or
within any specified period, the seller must deliver the same to
buyer at that very time or within that very period.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the buyer accepts goods delivered by the seller before or
after the time or period prescribed in the contract, the seller
shall be deemed to have so delivered the goods.
587. Documents concerning sold goods to be handed over: Except
otherwise provided for in the contract, the ownership of goods
shall not be deemed to have been transferred after sale until
basic documents connected with their ownership or required for
their use are handed over.
588. Delivery of goods in a quality different from contract quality:
(1) In case the seller delivers goods to the buyer in a quantity
less than the quantity referred to in the contract, the buyer may
refuse to accept them.
Provided that, in case the buyer accepts goods even in such
quantity, he/she shall be required to pay the price of the quantity
at the rate referred to in the contract.
(2) In case the seller delivers goods to the buyer in a quantity
higher than the quantity referred to in the contract, the buyer
may accept the goods only in the quantity referred to in the
contract, and reject the rest or the entire quantity.
Provided that, in case the buyer accepts the entire quantity of
goods so delivered, he/she shall be required to pay for them at
the contract rate.
(3) In case the seller delivers to the buyer the goods mixed with
goods of a description different than included in the contract,
the buyer may accept the goods stipulated in the contract and
reject the rest, or reject the entire lot of goods.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the buyer shall
not be bound to accept delivery of goods in installments.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case the
buyer refuses to accept goods brought by the seller for delivery,
the buyer shall not be bound to return them to the seller.
Provided that the buyer shall inform the seller through the quick
means of communication about his/her refusal along with the
reasons thereof.
589. Special provisions concerning Compensation: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Part, action in respect to
compensation for contract under this Chapter shall be taken as
follows:-
(a) In case a buyer does not accept or refuses to accept or refuses to
pay the price of goods after conclusion of a contract concerning
sale of goods, the seller may, subject to the contract, claim
compensation from the buyer in consideration of the buyer's
failure to accept or refuse to accept the goods.
(b) While determining compensation under clause (a), in case goods
not accepted or rejected by the buyer are available in the market,
compensation shall be determined on the basis of the difference
between the price of goods referred to in the contract and the
market or current price.
(c) In case the seller does not deliver or refuses to deliver goods
according to the contract after concluding a contract concerning
sale of goods, the buyer may claim compensation from the seller
in for his/her failure to deliver the goods.
While determining compensation under clause (c), in case the
goods which the seller has refused or failed to deliver to the
buyer are available in the market, compensation shall be
determined on the basis of difference between the price of the
goods referred to in the contract and the market or current price.
590. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-7
Contacts Concerning Guarantee
591. Contract Concerning Guarantee: (1) Where a contract is
concluded on the condition that in case a person fails to repay a
loan borrowed by him/her or fails to fulfill an obligation
promised by him/her, a third party shall repay the loan or fulfill
the obligation, a contract concerning guarantee shall be deemed
to have been concluded.
(2) Where a third party provides guarantee pursuant to sub Section (1) and in case the person who has to repay the loan
does not repay it or does not fulfill the obligation to be fulfilled,
the person providing guarantee to such loan or obligation shall
have to repay the loan or fulfill the obligation according to
conditions of the contract.
(3) The terms and conditions of guarantee shall be as referred to
in the contract.
(4) Contracts concerning guarantee shall have to be concluded in
written form.
592. Surety's Obligation: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the
contract, the surety's obligation shall be as follows:-
(a) Obligation of the surety shall arise from the very time
when the person who has to fulfill the obligation fails to
fulfill it.
(b) Obligation of a surety shall be similar to the obligation
of the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill any
obligation and the surety shall remain liable until the person
becomes free from the obligation of repaying the loan or
fulfilling the obligation.
(c) In case a security and guarantee both have been provided
for any loan or obligation, the surety shall not be liable to
the extent covered by the security so provided.
(d) The obligation of a surety shall not be terminated merely
because the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill the
obligation becomes free from the obligation by operation of
contract
concerning
guarantee
shall
effective
immediately after the person who has to pay or fulfill the
obligation breaches the obligation to be paid or fulfilled and
the creditor may cause to fulfill the said obligation from the
surety.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Part, the term 'creditor'
means a person who has provided a loan and also includes a
person who may obtain any benefits from or have any act
done by the person who has to repay the loan or fulfill the
obligation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
the creditor shall have to furnish a notice to the borrower to
perform the contract according to the terms and conditions of
the contract before making a claim to the surety under the
guarantee contract for payment of the amount not paid or the
obligation not fulfilled according to the contract.
593. Circumstances in which surety to be absolved from
obligation: (1) Except otherwise provided for in the contract,
the surety shall be free from obligation to the following extent
in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) In case the person who has to repay a loan or fulfill an
obligation alters the terms and conditions of the contract,
without the approval of the surety, in such a way as to
have substantial impact on the contract; in respect of
transactions to be carried out after such alteration;
(b) In case a contract is concluded to absolve from
obligation the person who has to fulfill the obligation in
respect to which the guarantee was provided;
(c) In case the person who has to repay a loan or fulfill an
obligation is absolved from obligation or in case the loan
is written off due to the action of the creditor;
(d) In case the creditor agrees to absolve the borrower
from the obligation by recovering a sum less than what is
due or to provide additional time limit for repaying the
loan or not to initiate a lawsuit;
(e) In case any action of the creditor causes an adverse
impact to the surety's right to legal remedy against the
person who is under obligation to repay the loan or fulfill
the obligation;
(f) In case the creditor loses, damages or returns any
security obtained by him from the borrower, to the extent
of the value of such a security;
(g) To the extent to which the person who is under
obligation to repay a loan or fulfill an obligation has
repaid the loan or fulfilled the obligation according to
the contract.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
the surety shall not be deemed to have been absolved from
the obligation, except otherwise provided for in the contract,
merely because the creditor fails to initiate legal action
against the surety or try to realize the amount to be realized
by him/her on time.
(3) In case there are two or more sureties and in case the
creditor absolves any one of them from the obligation, the
other sureties shall not be absolved from their respective
share in the obligation.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3)
and (4), in case the share in the obligation of the
surety/sureties cannot be separated, no surety shall be
deemed to have been absolved from his obligation merely
because the creditor has absolved him/her from the
obligation.
(5) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the surety
shall not be deemed to have been absolved from the
obligation under the contract merely because a dispute
arises among the parties in relation to the contract, which
has been concluded for fulfillment of an obligation under
the contract.
594. Relationship between the Surety and the Borrower: (1) The
surety shall cause the person who is under obligation to repay a
loan or fulfill the obligation according to the contract.
(2) In case the borrower has supplied any property or security to
the surety for the guarantee provided by him/her while
borrowing a loan or assuming an obligation, the surety shall
not pledge, mortgage, sell, or otherwise transfer the title
thereto without the consent of the borrower.
(3) In case a guarantee is provided for any specific purpose, the
objective, nature or terms and conditions of that loan or
obligation shall not be altered without the consent of the
surety.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), it
shall be according to the contract on the matters with regard
to the relationship between a surety and a borrower in a
contract.
595. Surety to substitute creditor: (1) After the surety repays the
loan to be repaid by the borrower or fulfills the obligation to be
fulfilled by the borrower under the contract, the surety shall
substitute the creditor in regard to that loan or obligation, and
may initiate legal action against the borrower as a creditor.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, the total amount and interest to be accrued on that
amount or any other fee or amount payable thereto shall be paid
by the borrower to the surety for the loan repaid or the
obligation fulfilled by the surety on his/her behalf according to
the contract concerning guarantee.
(3) In case it becomes necessary to initiate legal action because
of failure of the borrower to pay the amount payable by him/her
under sub-Section (2), or in case any other expenses incur in this
regard, the surety shall also be entitled to recover such expenses
from the borrower.
596. Circumstances on which Contract Concerning Guarantee may
be invalidated: In any of the following circumstances, the
surety may get the contract concerning guarantee invalidated:-
(a) In case the guarantee was obtained from the surety by the
creditor him/herself or by any other person on his/her consent by
supplying misleading or false notice or information on the
matter of the transaction for which the guarantee was given;
(b) In case the matter of guarantee, property or facts were
hidden or not disclosed;
(c) In case the contract has been concluded with the condition
that a third person would also become a surety but the third
person has not consented to provide the guarantee.
597. Obligation of Co-sureties to be Equal: (1) In case two or more
persons provides joint guarantee jointly or separately for any
loan or obligation and in case the borrower fails to repay the
loan or fulfill the obligation, the co-sureties shall repay the loan
or fulfill the obligation or the requirements of the contract on an
equal basis, except otherwise provided for in the contract.
(2) While providing a guarantee jointly pursuant to sub-Section
(1), in case the guarantee was provided on a compartment basis,
the surety shall be liable to pay or bear the obligation to the part
for which he/she has provided the guarantee.
598. Continuous Guarantee: (1) In case a guarantee is provided to
be expandable to a series of transaction, it shall be deemed to be
a continuous guarantee.
(2) In case a provision of a guarantee as referred to in sub Section (1) is made, the surety shall be liable to the extent of the
amount of guarantee that could not be recovered in the entire
period of the guarantee contract irrespective of the number of
transaction made thereunder.
(3) The surety may, by giving a notice to the creditor at least
three months in advance, revoke the continuous guarantee for
the transaction to be made in the future.
(4) Unless otherwise provided for in the contract, in case of
death of the surety, the continuous guarantee shall be deemed to
have, ipso facto, be terminated.
599. Contract concerning Indemnity: (1) In case a contract is
concluded with a condition that a party to a contract shall bear
any loss or damage that may result from any action while
working under the direction of such a party to the other party or
to the third party, it shall be deemed to be a contract concerning
indemnity.
(2) In case a contract referred to in sub-Section (1) is concluded,
the person may be entitled to recover as compensation all or any
of the following amounts subject to that contract:-
(a) The indemnity amount referred to in the contract;
(b) In case any loss or damage is caused to a third person,
the amount to be paid or borne therefor;
(c) The amount of expenses on the case filed or defended by
him/her in connection with the contract concerning
indemnity;
(d) The amount of expenses involved in litigation, for failure
to pay the amounts referred to in clauses (a) to (c).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1),
while performing any act under the direction of any party, in
case any person acts with the malafide intention to cause any
loss or damage negligently to such a party or to a third person,
and in case the concerned party or the third person suffers a loss
or damage or as a result thereof, he/she shall personally be liable
for such loss or damage.
600. Provision concerning Subrogation: (1) In case any person
concludes a contract with any other person against any loss or
damage that could be caused by a third person to his/her
property, facilities, rights enjoyed by him or benefits that could
result from his/her business, the person concluding such a
contract shall have to bear the obligation thereof whosoever has
caused such loss.
Provided that in case a contract is concluded to recover the loss
from any other person, it shall be recovered from such a person.
(2) In case of the loss caused pursuant to sub-Section (1), it shall
be according to the contract if stipulated in the contract and in
case it is not stipulated in the contract, a reasonable amount or
compensation shall be paid or shall cause to be paid to the
person affected by the loss or in case of his/her death, to his/her
successor.
(3) In case there is any loss or damage as referred to in sub Section (1), the person paying the amount or compensation
under Subsection (2) shall be deemed to have subrogated the
person who has sustained the loss or damage, and accordingly,
the subrogator may have the amount or compensation for such
loss or damage recovered from the person causing such loss or
damage.
601. Rights of Subrogator: The rights and liabilities of a subrogator
shall be as referred to in the contract, if any, and if not, they
shall be as follows:-
(a) All the rights, under the contract, of the person who has
sustained loss or damage shall devolve on the subrogator.
(b) The subrogator referred to in clause (a) may recover from the
person who has caused the loss or damage, or from the party to a
contract concluded in that connection, if any, the amount or
reasonable compensation paid by him/her to the person who has
suffered the loss or damage, as well as the expenses incurred for
litigation, if any.
602. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter8
Provisions Concerning Contracts of Bailment
603. Contract Concerning Bailment: (1) In case a person delivers
any goods to another person with a condition to return him/her
or to hand it over to any other person or to sell it as ordered by
him/her, a contract concerning bailment shall be deemed to have
been concluded.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any movable property other than currency in circulation
and also the title over such property.
(2) While concluding a contract pursuant to sub-Section (1), a
deed shall have to be executed while bailing any property the
price of which is more then twenty five thousand rupees.
604. Bailment deemed to be completed: (1) The process of bailment
shall be deemed to have been completed once the bailee receives
the goods under bailment.
(2) In case any property has already been kept by any person or
a person authorized by him/her under his/her custody or control,
the concerned property shall be deemed to have been taken as
bailment.
605. Details of bailed property to be stated: (1) In case a bailor
knows that the bailed property is not usable due to any defect in
it, or it may cause any harm or loss or that separate provisions or
arrangement must be made for its protection, he/she shall, to the
best of his/her knowledge, inform the bailee about all such
matters.
(2) In case the information that has to be supplied under sub Section (1) is not supplied even having knowledge about it, the
bailor shall be liable to the harm or damage caused by that
property or because of that goods to the bailee.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2),
while utilizing any goods bailed, in case any harm or loss is
caused by the goods because of defects of such goods, the bailor
shall be liable for the harm or loss so caused even if he/she does
not have any information as to the defect in the goods bailed.
606. Bailee's Obligation: (1) A bailee shall have to take reasonable
care and afford protection of the goods received by him/her as
bailed goods as referred to in the terms and conditions of the
contract, and as his/her own goods in case nothing has been
referred to in the contract.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in case any
bailed goods is lost, stolen, damaged, depreciated, decreased or
destroyed because of a natural calamity despite taking
reasonable care and affording protection pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the bailee shall not be liable to return such goods.
Provided that, in case the goods is lost, stolen, damaged,
depreciated, decreased or destroyed because of negligence or
malfide intention of the bailee, or of his/her failure to take care
or failure to afford protection according to the terms and
conditions of the contract, he/she shall be liable to return the
goods or pay an equivalent amount to the bailor.
(3) In case the bailee uses the bailed goods without having the
right to do so under the contract or in a manner contrary to the
terms and conditions of the contract, and in case such use causes
any loss, damage, destruction, depreciation or harm to the goods,
the bailee shall have to pay compensation to the bailor.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the bailee
shall not mix-up the bailor's goods with his/her own goods.
Provided that, in case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods
with that of the bailor, both parties shall have title on that goods,
as well as to the income accruing therefrom, in proportion to
their respective shares.
(5) In case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods with that of
the bailor and the goods so mixed-up could be separated, the two
parties shall have title to their respective goods so separated,
and the costs incurred for separating the goods so mixed up and
the loss caused, if any, to the bailor while mixing up such goods
in that manner shall be borne by the bailee.
(6) In case the bailee mixes up his/her own goods with that of
the bailor without the consent of the bailor and their goods could
not be separated as referred to in sub-Section (5), the title of the
bailor to the bailee's goods shall be terminated if he/she agrees
to obtain his/her share from the goods so mixed-up.
(7) In case the bailor does not agree to take his/her share from
such goods pursuant to sub-Section (6), the bailee shall have to
pay compensation for his/her goods.
607. Bailed Goods to be returned: (1) After the expiry of the period
prescribed while bailing goods or fulfillment of the objectives
for which the goods has been bailed, the bailee shall have to
return the bailed goods to the bailor.
(2) In case the goods is not returned under sub-Section (1)
within the specified period or within a reasonable period
according to the nature of the goods where no such period is
specified, or in case the bailor does not take it back and the
goods is lost, stolen, damaged, destroyed or reduced after that
date, or bailor suffers any loss or damage due to such goods
after that date the party because of which such loss or damage is
resulted shall bear the loss or damage.
(3) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, in the case of
a bailed goods owned by several persons, it may be handed over
to any one of such owners or to the person ordered by them, and
such hand over of the goods shall be deemed to have been duly
done.
(4) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, the goods
raised or earned through the bailed goods shall also belong to
the bailor.
608. Person bailing other's goods to be held responsible: In case
any person bails any goods, over which he/she has no title, right
or ownership, to any other person to keep as a bailed goods, and
in case the bailee has to bear any claim of a third party or any
loss, damage or any cost incurred while accepting that bailment,
the bailor shall be liable to pay such costs as well.
609. Goods given for repair and maintenance to be returned: (1)
In case any goods is given for repair, improvement or renovation
in any manner whatsoever, the goods shall be returned to the
owner having charged the costs incurred or the service charges
levied for the service of repair, improvement or renovation.
(2) The goods given under sub-Section (1) shall be returned to
the concerned owner having repaired, improved or renovated it
within the period specified in the contract. In case the goods is
not returned within the specified period, or any additional loss
or damage is caused to the goods or the goods is so damaged
that it has become unusable in the course of repair, improvement
or renovation, it shall be as provided for in the contract, and if
no provision has been made in the contract, a reasonable amount
of compensation shall be paid to the concerned owner.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the person who repairs, improves or renovates any
goods may keep it with him/herself until the cost of repair,
improvement or renovation or the service charge levied for that
purpose is paid. In case the cost or service charge is not paid
within a reasonable period, the person repairing, improving or
renovating the goods may recover his/her expenses or service
charges having sold the goods.
610. Bailment Costs: While bailing goods, the costs incurred for
looking after and affording protection of the bailed goods shall
be borne by the bailor, except otherwise provided for in the
contract.
611. Contract concerning bailment to be void: (1) In case it is
proved that any goods is bailed with the intention of avoiding a
partition of joint property or payment of any government
revenue or any amount involved in any claim to be paid to
anybody or for any other unlawful intention, the contract
concerning such bailment shall be void.
(2) In case the bailee does not keep the bailed goods according
to the term and conditions of the contract, the bailor may get the
bailed goods returned at any time.
612. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -9
Provisions Concerning Collateral or Deposit Contracts
613. Contracts Concerning Collateral or Deposit: (1) In case any
person takes a collateral while providing a credit to anyone as a
security for that credit or obtains any property as a deposit in the
form of a guarantee for performance of any act, it shall be
deemed to have concluded a contract concerning collateral or
deposit.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term 'goods'
means any movable or immovable property and title or
document establishing title to that property.
(2) In case a collateral is taken while providing a credit, the
credit and the interest to be accrued thereon and in case any
deposit is obtained to perform any work, the other costs
concerning that work and the costs incurred for taking care of
the collateral or deposit shall also be deemed to have been
included in the contract concerning collateral or deposit.
614. Collateral or deposit to be returned: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the collateral obtained for a credit
shall be returned upon repayment of the credit or the deposit
obtained for an act shall be refunded to the concerned person
after the completion of the performance of such an act.
(2) In case the collateral or deposit taken under sub-Section (1)
is or may be divided into different parts, the collateral or deposit
may be returned to the extent covered by the portion of the
credit repaid or the act performed.
615. Rights of person accepting collateral or deposit: (1) In case a
credit is obtained having pledged any goods as collateral and the
borrower fails to repay the credit or the interest accrued thereon,
if any, within the specified period, the person who has taken the
collateral may initiate action according to law and recover the
amount to be recovered for the credit having sold or auctioned
the collateral according to current market price or transfer the
ownership of such collateral in his/her name subject to law, in
case it cannot be sold or auctioned.
(2) In case the goods pledged as collateral is sold at a price
lesser than the amount to be recovered from the borrower by the
person who has taken the collateral under sub-Section (1), the
shortfall amount may be recovered from other assets of the
borrower. In case the collateral is sold at a price higher than the
amount to be recovered, the excess amount shall be refunded to
the borrower.
(3) Notwithstanding anything containing in sub-sections (1) and
(2), in case the goods pledged as collateral has not yet been sold
or its ownership has not yet been transferred, the person who has
pledged the goods as collateral may clear his goods by repaying
the credit and interest thereon and any other amount payable at
any time.
Provided that, the person who pledges the goods as collateral
shall also be liable to bear additional liability incurred on the
goods pledged as collateral owing to his/her failure to repay the
amount within the specified period.
(4) In case anyone is entrusted with the responsibility of
performing any act having accepted any goods as deposit, and if
the concerned person fails to complete the concerned act within
the specified period, the goods pledged as deposit may be used
to complete the act or to recover the costs incurred thereupon.
(5) In case the act cannot be completed from the goods pledged
as deposit, the shortfall amount may be recovered from the other
assets of the person who furnishes the deposit.
616. Consequences of pledging goods without title as collateral or
deposit: (1) In case anyone has availed a credit or an act having
pledged as collateral or deposited any goods to which he/she has
no title or ownership or any goods received under a contract
which is void under this Part and the person obtaining such a
collateral or deposit has no knowledge of this fact, the person
taking the goods on collateral or deposit may demand the goods
from the person who has given the collateral or deposit the
goods to which he/she has a title and in case the collateral or
deposit could not be pledged as demanded, the person taking
such a collateral or deposit may get the contract to be void.
(2) In case any goods received under a void contract is pledged
as collateral or deposit, and such a contract has already become
void before furnishing such collateral or deposit or the party
receiving the collateral or deposit had the knowledge that the
concerned goods did not belong to the person pledging it as
collateral or deposit, the person obtaining such goods as
collateral or deposit shall have no right over such goods and
he/she may recover the amount to be recovered by him/her or
have the work performed from the other goods of the party
pledging the collateral or deposit.
(3) In case the person who pledges the collateral or deposit has a
partial or limited title to, or ownership of, the goods pledged as
collateral or deposit, the person accepting such goods as
collateral or deposit shall also have title to that goods to the
same extent.
617. Creditors to be on pari pasu Position: (1) In case anyone has
availed credit from several creditors in one or several
installments having pledged his/her goods as collateral and the
goods so pledged as collateral is not sufficient to repay the
credit of all the creditors, except otherwise provided for in the
contract, all the creditors who have taken the goods as collateral
shall be deemed to be on pari pasu position in respect to the
credit outstanding and all of them may make a proportionate
claim on the goods accordingly.
(2) The contract entered into giving priority right in future to a
creditor on the goods already pledged as collateral pursuant to
sub-Section (1) shall be void. In case the creditor has already
recovered his/her credit from the collateral before the contract
becomes void even while having knowledge that there are other
creditors in respect to the collateral, he/she shall have to refund
the amount to the other creditors and recover his/her credit from
the other assets of the person who has pledged the goods as
collateral.
618. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter10
Provisions Concerning Agency Contracts
619. Contracts Concerning Agency: Any person may appoint any
other person as his/her agent to do anything on his/her behalf,
except the matter connected with his/her personal skills, to
conduct business as his/her agent or carry on any transaction
with a third person on his/her behalf or to represent him to such
a person, or to establish any type of legal relation with the
person appointing an agent and a third person, and in case an
agent is so appointed, a contract concerning agency shall be
deemed to have been concluded.
620. Recognition of transaction carried out by Agent: (1) A person
who may carry out something himself/herself may carry out or
cause to be carried out the same through an agent, subject to the
Provided that no act may be carried out through an agent for
which one has to be present in person.
(2) The contract concluded through an agent appointed pursuant
to Section 619 or the act performed by the representative shall
be deemed to have been carried out by the concerned person and
the obligation arising out of such an act shall be implemented
having recognized it as the contract concluded or the act carried
out by the principal.
Provided that, the principal shall not be liable for any act carried
out by the agent beyond his/her authority except in case he/she
has accepted such an act.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), out
of the acts performed beyond the authority, in case some of the
acts are within his/her authority and some are beyond it and in
case the part performed within his/her authority can be separated,
the principal shall be liable for acts performed to the extent of
the authority.
621. Sub-agents May be appointed: (1) In case it is necessary to
appoint a sub-agent according to the nature of any trade,
business or transaction or a sub-agent may be appointed having
regard to the provision of the contract or usage, the agent may,
except otherwise provided for in the contract, appoint a subagent with the consent of the principal.
Provided that an agent who has been appointed on the condition
that he/she shall personally represent or personally carry out any
act may not appoint a sub-agent.
(2) In case a sub-agent is appointed pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the principal shall be informed accordingly, and the sub-agent so
appointed in that manner shall have right and duty equal to that
of the agent appointed by the principal.
(3) In case any agent appoints a sub-agent without the consent
of the principal, the principal shall not be liable for any act done
or work performed by the sub-agent.
(4) The agent appointing the sub-agent shall be personally liable
for the acts referred to in sub-Section (3).
622. Matters to be complied with by Agent: (1) Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, an agent shall comply with the
following matters:-
(a) Acts to be carried out subject to the conditions of the
contract concerning agency and the directives issued by
the principal.
(b) In case no condition is stipulated in the contract or the
principal does not issue any directive, the agent shall
work as entrusted to him/her in the manner in which it
has to be performed according to the nature of the
business and the laws and usages of the place of
transaction, with bona fide intention, full dedication and
necessary skills and efficiency.
Provided that in case the principal has a knowledge in
advance that the agent has no efficiency or capacity on
any matter, the agent shall not be liable for any loss or
damage resulting from such lack of efficiency or
capacity.
(c) An agent who has been removed from his/her position
shall not continue to do anything on the same matter as
in the capacity of an agent.
(d) The agent shall have to give or show the details of
account and records concerning the agency business as
and when required by the principal.
(e) In case any obstruction, obstacle or difficulty arises in
the course of performing works concerning an agency,
the agent shall notify the principal as soon as possible
and obtain necessary directives, and the principal shall
be liable for any action taken according to the directives
so issued.
(2) In case the principal suffers any loss or damage because of
the failure of the agent to fulfill his/her duties under clauses (a),
(b) and (c), the agent shall personally bear loss or damage so
incurred.
623. Agent to be responsible: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agent shall be personally liable for
transactions made by him/her on behalf of the principal in the
following circumstances:-
(a) In case he/she concludes a contract with a third party
in relation to any transaction with provision for
personal responsibility.
(b) In case any work has been done for or on behalf of an
undisclosed principal, in case the principal is not
disclosed;
(c) In case the principal cannot be sued for any reason;
(d) In case the contract is concluded in his/her own name;
(e) In case anything is done in contravention of the
contract concerning the appointment of agent or
beyond his/her authority;
(f) In case any misrepresentation or fraud has been
committed in the course of the transaction;
(g) In case the agent has to bear personal obligation
according to the nature of the trade;
(h) In case the interest of the agent is also involved in the
transaction.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract concluded
between the agent and a third person, merely the fact that the
agent is personally liable under sub-Section (1) shall not be
deemed to have prejudiced the right of the third person to make
any claim against the principal and legal action may be initiated
against the principal as well for arrears due from the agent.
(3) For the purpose of initiating legal action against the
principal pursuant to sub-Section (2), the statutory limitation
shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of the last
payment made by the agent.
624. Principal to be Liable for Inducement to Believe for Having
Authority: (1) If the principal has informed or induced to
believe a third person that he/she has given authority to any
other person to act on his/her behalf, the principal shall be liable
for any act done by the agent on his/her behalf unless the third
party has come to know or has reasonable ground to have
knowledge that the authority is not given.
(2) In cases referred to in sub-Section (1), the principal may be
liable even for the acts done by the agent beyond the authority
given, if there is a reasonable ground to believe that the agent is
given authority.
625. Termination of Agency: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, the agency shall be deemed to have, ipso facto,
been terminated in the following circumstances:-
In case the agent voluntarily informs the Principal
not to continue as an agent;
(b) In case the principal revokes the authority granted or
contract concluded with the agent or gives a notice
agent
regarding
impossibility
performance of the contract;
In case the agent has been appointed for any specific
business and that business is completed;
(d) In case the agent has been appointed for a specific
period, such a period is completed;
In case the principal or the agent dies or becomes a
person of unsound mind;
In case the principal is declared to be a bankrupt;
(g) In case the matter for which the agent has been
appointed no longer exists;
(h) In case an agent is appointed by a body corporate if
such body corporate is liquidated or dissolved.
(2) All or any of the authority granted by the principal to the
agent may be revoked at any time before the agent exercises
them and in case the authority is so revoked, information thereof
shall immediately be given to the representative.
Provided that, in case the agent has already exercised some of
such authority, the work performed regarding to the authority
shall not be deemed to have been revoked.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the agent has a share in the property connected
with the main matter of the agency, the agent may not be
removed, in such a manner so as to have an adverse impact on
such share.
626. Agent not to be removed: (1) Except otherwise provided for in
the contract, in case an agent is appointed for any specific
period or work, the principal shall not remove him/her before
that period or before the completion of that work without
reasonable and sufficient grounds.
(2) An agent who is appointed without specifying any certain
period or work may not be removed without a prior notice
giving appropriate reasons;
(3) In case the principal removes any agent in a manner in
contravention of sub-Section (1) or (2), the principal shall pay a
reasonable compensation to the agent.
627. Agent not to give up agency: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Act, except otherwise provided for
in the contract, the agent who is appointed for a specific period
or work shall not give up work as an agent before the expiry of
the specific period or completion of the specified work without
reasonable and sufficient grounds.
(2) An agent who is appointed without specifying the period or
work under sub-Section (1) shall not give up that work without
informing the principal in advance along with the reasons
therefor.
(3) In case any agent gives up the work in that capacity in
contravention of sub-Section (1) or (2), the principal may claim
a reasonable compensation.
628. Sub-agent also to leave if agent leaves: In case an agent no
longer remains in that capacity under this Part, the sub-agent
appointed by him/her shall also be deemed to have, ipso facto,
be removed.
629. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter-11
Contracts Concerning Transportation of Goods
630. Contracts
Concerning
Transportation:
contract
concerning transportation shall be deemed to have been
concluded if it provides for the transportation of goods from one
place to another.
(2) Except otherwise provided for in the contract, a receipt or a
bill to be issued by the transporter to the owner of goods for
transportation of the goods at the time of handing over for the
purpose of transportation shall be recognized as an evidence of
contract concluded between the transporter and owner of the
goods.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, the term
'transporter' means a person operating a transport service other
than air or marine transport or a person operating a business of
such transportation, and the term also includes a person
operating the transport business through internal navigation
transport, rope ways or animal or any other means.
Provided that, in case any person employed by the owner of
goods on wage basis or his/her agent or a person working under
his/her supervision transports goods, such a person shall not be
recognized as a transporter for the purpose of this Chapter.
631. Transporter's obligations: (1) It shall be the obligation of the
transporter to transport the goods received from the owner of the
goods for transportation at the specified destination and in its
proper condition.
(2) In case goods received from the owner for transportation is
lost, destroyed, broken, defaced, damaged or in case the goods
cannot be delivered in proper condition for any manner
whatsoever, the transporter shall be liable therefor.
(3) The transporter shall have to transport goods within the time
specified in the contract and within a reasonable time in case no
period for transporting the goods has been specified in the
contract, and transport and hand over the goods to the owner or
his/her agent or a person designated by him/her.
632. Transporter Receiving the goods to be liable: In case goods is
to be transported by more than one transporter or though more
than one means of transportation, except otherwise provided for
in the contract, the transporter to whom the owner of goods has
handed over the goods shall personally be liable for the purpose
of this Chapter.
633. Obligation of transporter to be limited: (1) Except in cases
where the owner of goods or his/her agent has clearly declared
at the time of concluding a contract or except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the compensation for the loss or
damage of the goods transported by the transporter shall not
exceed ten thousand rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
transporter shall not be liable for any loss or damage of gold,
sliver, diamond, jewelry or goods made thereof, precious stone,
negotiable instruments, securities, documents registered at
offices, certificates issued by academic and other institutes,
coins, bank notes, postal stamps, fish, meat, fresh fruits and
vegetables,
insecticide
toxic
materials,
inflammable
materials, petroleum products, precious fine art works, idols,
curio goods or glass or goods made of glass or the goods that are
highly breakable or fragile, wildlife and domestic animals and
avian, handicraft products, arms and ammunition, explosives,
radio, television, computer and so on and their spare parts,
machinery and the goods specified in the law in force as the
goods to be declared by the owner before the transportation,
except the owner or his/her agent has clearly declared at the
time of conclusion of a contract or at the time of handing over
the goods to the transporter for transportation.
(3) For the purpose of bearing the risk involved in the
transportation of the goods referred to in sub-Section (2), the
transporter may insure the goods through the owner of the goods
or his/her representative or insure the goods on his/her own
having charged separate fee to the owner or the transporter may
make other necessary provisions for mitigation of the risks.
634. Transporter to be Liable: In case of loss or damage of the
goods which has been declared at the time of concluding a
contract under this Chapter or at the time of handing over the
goods to the transporter for transportation or to the goods that
needs not be declared, the transporter shall pay in case anything
stipulated in the contract and if nothing is stipulated therein,
reimburse the goods transported with the consent of the owner
of the goods or in case there is no consent or the consent cannot
be determined, the price of such goods and even the price of the
goods cannot be determined, a reasonable amount of price and
also compensation for the damage or loss to the owner of the
goods shall have to pay to the owner, subject to Chapter 5.
635. Termination of Transporter's Obligation: Except otherwise
provided for in the contract, the obligation of a transporter shall
be deemed to have terminated in any of the following
circumstances:-
In case the transporter or his/her representative
transports and hands over the goods to the owner or
his/her agent, or a person designated by him/her;
(b) In case the goods handed over to the transporter is
received back by the owner or his/her agent.
In case the transporter or his/her representative
returns
goods
owner
his/her
representative showing reasons for the goods that
cannot be transported within the specified period for
arising out of any circumstance referred to in clause
(b) of sub-Section (2) of Section 559 of Chapter-4 of
this Part.
636. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter12
Provisions Concerning Lease Contracts
637. Lease Contract deemed to be concluded: (1) In case a
contract has been concluded with a condition that any person
gives any other person any goods under his/her title and
ownership to use and enjoy the benefits to be derived therefrom
for a certain period for getting rent regularly, it shall be deemed
to have concluded a lease contract.
Explanation: (1) For the purpose of this Chapter, “goods"
means any type of movable or immovable property from which
benefit may be acquired having utilized or used it without
diminishing it.
In a contract concluded pursuant to sub-Section (1), unless
otherwise provided for in the contract, the lessor has to make
sure the lessee of the following matters:-
(a) To transfer certain goods to be transferred for use
according to the contract;
(b) the goods transferred pursuant to clause (a) to be
maintained in good condition so that it may be used or
utilized at the time of the transfer
(c) To make a provision that the goods transferred pursuant
to clause (a) or (b) could be used or utilized peacefully
and without any interruption.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the goods that would be destroyed while using or
consumable goods may not be given on lease.
Provided that such goods may be given on lease for using them
for particular purpose without consuming them.
638. Form of the Goods given for lease not to be changed: During
the period of lease contract, no change may be made in the
fundamental form of the leased goods.
639. Goods on lease to be used in good faith: (1) The lessee shall
have to use and utilize the goods taken under a lease contract in
good faith and in prudential manner like the goods of his/her
ownership.
(2) While using or utilizing the leased goods pursuant to sub Section (1), it shall be used or utilized according to the
objectives of the lease contract.
(3) While using or utilizing the leased goods pursuant to sub Section (1) or (2), necessary provision of security shall be made
according to the nature of such goods.
(4) In case it is proved that the leased goods has been used in
contravention of sub-Section (1), (2) or (3), the lessor may at
any time terminate such a contract.
640. Leased Goods to be repaired: (1) Unless otherwise provided for
in the lease contract, the lessor shall repair the goods taken
under the lease.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in case
the goods taken under lease could not be used or utilized
without repair, maintenance or reform immediately, the lessee
himself/herself may repair, maintain or reform such goods
having informed the lessor.
(3) The lessor shall have to reimburse or adjust in rent the expenses
incurred for repair, maintenance or reform made pursuant to
sub-Section (2).
641. Lessor to be informed: (1) In case the goods taken on lease
according to a lease contract or any part thereof is lost or
destroyed or turned to be unusable or non-utilizable or any
person makes a claim over it or raises a dispute about such
goods in any manner whatsoever or creates hindrance or
disturbances while utilizing the goods, the lessee shall inform
about it to the lessor immediately.
Upon receipt of the information pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the lessor shall have to carry out repair, maintenance,
reform or seek legal remedies as may be necessary to bring back
the goods in the previous condition according to the nature of
the goods within a period of fifteen days.
In case the leased goods could not be brought back to the
previous condition, the lease rent amount shall be deducted in
proportion to the extent to which such goods was lost or
destroyed or not used or utilized or hindered or disputed about.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case the loss or damage has been caused due to the
use or usage of the leased goods by the lessee, a member of
his/her family, employee, worker or agent in contravention of

Section 3, the lessee shall be liable for it and he/she shall have
to bring back the goods in the previous condition accordingly.
642. Lessee to be responsible for loss or damage of the leased
goods: (1) The lessee shall use or utilize the leased goods
having adopted adequate measures of safety in order to save the
leased goods from loss or destruction.
(2) In case the goods under a lease is lost or destroyed for any
reason while the lease contract is in force or it is lost or
destroyed in any manner or it is damaged because of negligence
of the lessee, any member of his/her family, his/her agent or of
the third party and the price of the goods is decreased, the lessee
shall be liable for it and for that he/she shall have to pay
compensation.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1) or (2),
the lessee shall not be liable for the loss or damage caused to the
leased goods due to the natural calamities (force majuere).
In case of partial loss or damage of leased goods because
of natural calamity (force majuere) referred to in sub-Section (3)
and in case the lessor does not or could not bring it back to the
previous condition, the lessor shall have to reduce the lease rent
in proportion to the loss or damage.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "natural
calamity" means any of the following natural calamities:-
(a) A storm, earthquake, eruption of volcano;
(b) Excessive
rain,
floods,
landslide,
soil,
erosion,
thunderstorm;
(c) Fire caused by any manner, except caused by intention,
negligence or recklessness of the lessee, his family
member, employee, workers or third party;
(d) Terrorism, civil riots, civil war;
(e) Other natural calamities of similar nature beyond
control of human being.
643. Lease Rent to be Paid: (1) The lessee shall pay to the lessor
the lease rent according to the terms and conditions of the lease
contract.
(2) In case the terms and conditions of payment of the lease rent
are not specified pursuant to sub-Section (1), the lease rent shall
be paid on the next day of end of each month in case of movable
property; within fifteen days of the end of every fiscal year in
case of farmland, servitude, industrial or infrastructure
construction or housing land and within one week of end of
every month in case of other goods.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in case any person does not let the lessee to use such
goods or any part thereof having created disputes or any type of
hindrance or obstruction about the leased goods or any part
thereof, the lessee may reduce the lease rent proportionally.
644. Period of Lease Contract: (1) No lease contract with regard to
the following goods shall remain valid for more than the
following period:-
(a) Thirty years in case of the housing land leased for building
construction or the house and land in use having
constructed the home;
(b) Thirty years in case of the land leased for the purpose of
servitude;
(c) Thirty years in case of the land leased for the purpose of
industrial structure or construction, development and
operation of infrastructure like roads, canals, electricity
generation;
(d) Thirty years in case of land for farming;
(e) Nineteen years in case of house and land leased for the
purposes other than those referred to in clauses (a), (b), (c)
and (d);
(f) Fifteen years in case of transport vehicles;
(g) Fifteen years in case of machinery equipment other than
transport vehicles;
(h) Fifteen years in case of machinery equipment other than
those referred to in clauses (f) and (g);
(i) Ten years in case of domestic animals;
(j) Ten years in case of goods other than those referred to in
this Section having regard to their life and nature.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), the
parties may extend the duration of the lease contract subject to
the lease term of the contract, before expiry of the period
referred to in the said sub-Section.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), the
parties to the contract may decide whether or not to extend the
duration of the lease terms having regard to the place of location
of the house and land under the lease contract and the nature of
the goods.
645. Leased Goods may be sub-leased: (1) The lessee may, having
obtained a prior approval of the lessor, sub-lease to any person a
goods or any part thereof leased once under a lease contract
having entered into a sub-lease contract.
The lessee shall not be relieved from obligation towards
the lessor for the reason of the second lease pursuant to sub Section (1).
The terms and conditions with regard to the goods given
under sublease contract shall not be inconsistent with the terms
and conditions of the first lease contract.
While determining the terms and conditions of a lease
contract pursuant to sub-Section (3), provision may be made that
the sub-lessee shall be directly responsible to the lessor with
regard to the leased good and in case such provisions are made,
he/she shall be responsible to the lessor to the extent of the sublease contract.
The period of validity of the lease contract concluded
pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall not exceed the period of
validity of the lease contract concluded between the lessor and
the lessee.
In case the lessor seeks legal remedies under this Chapter
or makes a claim against the lessee, the sub-lessee shall not be
responsible towards it except in the cases referred to in sub Section (4).
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the rights which a lessor may exercise under a lease
contract shall not be deemed to have been hindered in any
manner.
646. Goods taken on lease to be Returned: (1) In case a lease
contract terminates for any reason whatsoever, the lessee shall
have to return back the goods taken on lease under this Chapter
to the lessor within a period of seven days of the termination of
the lease contract.
Provided that in case of an immovable property, it shall be
deemed that the lessor shall, ipso facto, have right to use after
seven days of the expiry of the lease contract.
The goods taken on a lease pursuant to sub-Section (1)
shall be returned back on the same condition as it was at the
time of taking on lease.
Provided that the lessee shall not be liable for decay or
depreciation in natural course while using or utilizing the goods.
In case record of the goods or its accessories and spare
parts had been maintained at the time of taking on lease, the
goods and its accessories and spare parts shall also have to be
returned while returning goods on lease pursuant to sub-Section
(1) or (2).
Provided that the accessories or spare parts that used to be lost
or destroyed while using according to nature of the goods need
not to be returned.
647. Special Provision concerning lease contract of immovable
property:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, lease contract of immovable property shall be
concluded in written form.
(2) While leasing out an immovable property for a period more
than ten years, it shall be registered with an agency legally
authorized for that purpose having specified the same
contents.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter,
immovable property may not be leased to the person who
may not acquire immovable property in Nepal according to
law for the purpose of farming, building construction or
housing development without approval of Government of
Nepal.
(4) The building, shed or other structure built by the lessee or
the garden, forest or trees located in a land leased according
to a lease contract shall, except otherwise provided for in
the contract, be deemed to be under the title and ownership
of the lessee and accordingly, he/she shall have to remove
such building, shed, or structure or garden or forest and
trees from such land.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (4) in
case the lessor desires to take back such building, shed or
other structure or garden, forest or trees located in such land
on as it is basis, he/she shall have to pay a mutually agreed
price for the same.
648. Lease contract may be terminated: (1) The
lessor
terminate the lease contract in any of the
following
circumstances:-
(a) In case the lessee does not pay the lease amount within
a period of ninety days after the date scheduled for
payment of the lease rent is over without permission of
the lessor;
(b) In case the goods taken on lease is used or utilized in
contravention of Section 639;
(c) In case lessor is not informed or given information on
the matters on which information shall have to give the
lessor pursuant to sub-Section (1) of Section 641;
(d) In case the leased goods is not brought back to the
previous
condition
within
reasonable
period
according to the nature of the goods pursuant to sub Section (4) of Section 641;
(e) In case the goods leased has been sub-leased again
without approval of the lessor.
The lessee may terminate the lease contract in any of
following circumstances:-
(a) In case the goods could not be used or utilized for the
purpose or objectives for which it has been taken on
lease;
(b) In case the lessor does not bring back the goods taken
on lease pursuant to sub-Section (4) of Section 641;
(c) In case the lease rent amount is not reduced or agreed
to reduce pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section 640;
(d) In case the lease rent amount is not decreased or agreed
to be decreased pursuant to sub-Section (3) of Section
641 and or sub-Section (4) of Section 642.
649. Provisions Concerning House Rent to Apply: Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the provisions
referred to in Chapter-9 of Part 4 shall apply in case of house
rent.
650. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -13
Provisions Concerning Hire Purchase Contracts
651. Hire purchase contract deemed to be concluded (1) In case
anyone hires any goods to anyone on the following terms and
conditions, it shall be deemed to have concluded a hire purchase
contract:-
(a) The owner of the goods permits the person taking on hire
to use such goods with a condition to pay the amount in
installment in periodic basis for that goods;
(b) The person taking on hire the goods may purchase the
goods on hire according to the terms and conditions of
contract;
(c) The ownership of such goods to be transferred to the
person taking the goods on hire upon payment of the
final installment amount;
(d) The person taking on hire may terminate the contract at
any time prior to the transfer of ownership pursuant to
clause (c).
(2) The contract referred to in sub-Section (1) shall be in written
form.
(3) The owner of the goods shall have to make available one copy
of the contract concluded pursuant to this Section to the person
taking on hire free of cost.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) " Goods" means any movable property that may be given
on hire for the purpose of using it;
(b) "Person taking on hire" means the person who receives
any goods on hire for use according to a hire purchase
contract and also includes his/her successor or other third
person to receive the goods under such contract in the
event of his/her death.
652. Matters to be specified in a hire purchase contract: (1) The
following matters shall be specified in the contract referred to in

Section 651:-
(a) The goods concerning the contract and its short
description;
(b) Hire purchase price of the goods concerning the contract;
(c) Cash price of the goods concerning the contract;
(d) The date on which the contract is deemed to be
commenced;
(e) The installment amount payable by the person taking on
hire to the owner of goods and number of installments;
(f) The date of payment of each installment and the method
of payment;
(g) The person and place for payment of amount pursuant to
clause (f).
(2) In case the installment amount may be paid by any method other
than cash pursuant to clause (f) of sub-Section (1), its brief
description shall be specified in the hire purchase contract.
(3)In case a hire purchase contract has been concluded without
stipulating the terms and conditions referred to in this Section,
the person taking the goods on hire may file a complaint to get
such contract rescinded and in case the court deems that nonstipulation of any of such terms and conditions in the contract
causes adverse effects to the person taking on hire, court may
revoke such contract or may issue any order as it deems fit.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) "Hire purchase price" means the total amount to be paid
by the person taking the goods on hire to purchase or
acquire the goods having paid full price of the goods and
also includes the amount to be paid as deposit or down
payment.
(b) "Cash price" means the price to be paid in cash with
which the person taking on hire may purchase any goods.
653. Conclusion of more than one contract to be deemed as
conclusion of a single contract: (1) If separate contracts are
concluded in connection with conclusion of a hire purchase
contract such as the contract between the person taking on hire
and the owner of the goods; between a surety or investor and the
owner of such goods for payments of the hire purchase price
installment or in case of bailment of any goods, between the
bailor and the bailee of such goods, they shall be deemed to be a
single contract for the purpose of this Chapter.
In case where the contract referred to in sub-Section (1)
have been concluded in different dates, the latest date shall be
regarded as the date of conclusion of the contract.
654. Consequences of Conclusion of a Hire Purchase Contract: (1)
Notwithstanding any other thing contained in the contract
between the parties, the following terms and conditions shall be
deemed to be inherent in a hire purchase contract concluded
under this Chapter:-
(a) The right of uninterrupted use of the goods on hire by
the person taking the goods on hire;
(b) The goods to be free from any type of charge or claim
of any one at the time of transferring the goods by the
owner of the goods to the person taking on hire the
goods pursuant to clause (a)
(c) The owner of the goods has assured the person taking
on hire the goods of providing him/her a reasonable
opportunity to compare such goods with the sample;
(d) Right of the owner of the goods to sell such goods at
the time of transferring the goods by the owner to the
person taking on hire;
(e) The goods referred to in clause (a) has the satisfactory
quality at the time of transfer of the goods, and
(f) In case the person taking on hire has informed the
owner of the goods that he/she is hiring the goods for
any particular purpose, the owner of the goods has
guaranteed that such goods or its quality is
appropriate for that purpose.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) of sub Section (1), the owner of the goods shall not be liable for the
quality of the goods in any of the following circumstances:-
(a) The owner of the goods could not know the defect in
the goods for which hire purchase contract was
concluded at the time of concluding the contract;
(b) The hire purchase contract itself has a stipulation
about defect of the goods;
(c) In case the quality of the goods matches with the
sample while matching by the person taking on hire;
(d) The hire purchase contract was concluded with regard
to a second hand goods and the matter was specified
in the contract.
In case the person taking goods on hire takes the
goods on hire on the basis of a sample, the owner of the goods
shall be deemed to have assured of the fact that all of such
goods matches with the sample.
In case a contract has been concluded under this Chapter
and any goods or its quality has been specified in the contract, it
shall be deemed that the owner of the goods has assured of the
fact that such goods or its quality shall be as specified in the
contract.
Provided that in case the sample is also stated in the contract,
matching of the quality of such goods with that of the sample
may not be enough and it shall have to be matched with the
description of the contract.
655. Transfer of ownership of goods: Ownership of the goods
related to the hire purchase contract shall be transferred to the
person taking the goods on hire upon completion of the purchase
according to the hire purchase price determined in accordance
with the contract concluded under this Chapter.
Provided that the right to use shall be deemed to have been
created at the time of receiving such goods by him.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, "completion of
purchase" means the payment of the last installment of the hire
purchase price.
656. Care and maintenance of goods taken on Hire: (1) The status
of the goods taken on hire shall be as of the bailment until the
transfer of its ownership pursuant to Section 655.
Unless otherwise provided for in the hire purchase
contract, the person taking on hire the goods concerning such
contract shall take reasonable care and maintain the goods as the
goods in his/her own ownership.
In case such goods is lost or damaged because of not
taking reasonable care of and lack of maintenance, the person
taking on hire shall be liable for that.
657. Installment amount to be paid: The person taking on hire the
goods shall have to pay the installment amount as determined in
the hire purchase contract for hiring the goods within the time
and according to the method as stipulated in the said contract.
658. Contract may be terminated by paying installment amount:
(1) The person taking on hire may, having given an advance
notice of at least fifteen days to the owner of the goods and
having paid the hire purchase price of the goods or the amount
of remaining installment, terminate the hire purchase contract.
While terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the person taking on hire may be entitled to the discount, if any.
659. Contract may be terminated having returned goods: (1)The
person taking on hire may, at any time prior to payment of the
last installment as determined according to the hire purchase
contract for the goods, terminate the contract having given a
written notice to the owner of the goods at least fifteen days in
advance.
Prior to terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section
(1), the person taking on hire shall have to return the goods
taken on hire to the owner according to the hire purchase
contract and if there is any amount due to be paid such amount
shall also have to be paid.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2), in
case the person taking on hire has paid more than half of the hire
purchase price prior to terminating the hire purchase contract,
he/she does not need to pay any more amount and in case he/she
has paid less than the half amount, he/she shall have to pay up to
the half of the amount.
Nothing contained in sub-Section (3) shall be deemed to
have waived the person taking on hire from paying any other
amount, charge or dues to be payable according to the hire
purchase contract.
660. Person taking on hire may transfer right and interest: (1)
The person taking on hire may, having obtained approval of the
owner of the goods, transfer to any other person the rights,
interests or liability over the goods he/she has taken on hire
according to the hire purchase contract and other rights or
interests to be available to him/her under such a contract.
(2) For the purpose of sub-Section (1), the owner of the goods
shall have to give approval or deny approval within a period
of fifteen days of the date on which the person taking on hire
has made a written request with an intention of getting
approval from the owner to transfer his/her rights and
interests and in case the approval could not be obtained
within the said period, he/she shall be deemed to have denied
the approval.
(3) In case the owner of the goods denies pursuant to sub Section (2), the person taking on hire may file a complaint at
a court within thirty five days to get the denial revoked and
in case the court issues an order that the denial is not
reasonable, it shall be deemed that the approval has been
obtained from the owner of the goods.
(4) Nothing contained in this Section shall be deemed to have
hindered to utilize or exercise the rights, interests or liability
in case where such rights, interests or liability of the person
taking on hire have been transferred to another person by
operation of law.
661. To be liable in case of use of goods against terms and
conditions: The person taking on hire shall be liable for using
the goods concerning the hire purchase contract against the
terms and conditions of such a contract.
662. Information of actual condition of goods to be given: The
person using the goods relating to the hire purchase contract
shall, within a period of fifteen days in case the owner has asked
to inform the owner of the goods about where the goods is
located in what condition and the benefits to be derived from it
are in what condition.
663. Owner of Goods to may terminate Contract: (1) In case the
person taking on hire fails to pay more than one installment of
the hire purchase price to be paid to the owner of the goods
according to the hire purchase contract, the owner of the goods
may, having furnished an advance notice to such a person as
stated herein below, terminate the hire purchase contract at any
time:
(a) In case the installment amount is to be paid within a
period of one week or less than that period, of one
week.
(b) In the cases other than those referred to in clause (a),
of fifteen days.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the person taking on hire makes the payment of the
installment and the interest to be accrued thereon according
to the hire purchase contract before expiry of the time frame
for furnishing the advance notice under the said sub-Section,
the hire purchase contract shall not be terminated.
(3) In case the person taking on hire does not follow the hire
purchase contract or the terms and conditions referred to in

Section 656 or 662, the concerned owner of the goods may
terminate the hire purchase contract having given a notice of
at least fifteen days.
(4) Upon terminating the contract pursuant to sub-Section (1),
the owner of the goods may exercise the following rights
with regard to the goods given on hire:-
(a) To return the goods wherever and in whatsoever
situation it may be, and if could not be returned, to
be seized;
(b) Out of the amount paid in lieu of such goods, the
amount that may be recoverable as hire may be
retained and the person taking on hire to be informed
to take the excess amount;
(c) To forfeit the amount taken as deposit from the
person who takes on hire at the time of giving the
goods on hire, if any;
(d) To enter into the house in which the goods is located
with the assistance of police in connection with
seizure of the goods taken on hire;
(e) To recover compensation from the amount paid or
make a claim for the loss or damage caused due to
failure to return the goods taken on hire on time or
failure to fulfill the contracts or the terms and
conditions referred to in Section 656 or 662.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Section, in case the person taking on hire or surety or
investor has already paid at least the basic price of the
goods taken on hire, the owner may not terminate the hire
purchase contract under this Section.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "basic price"
means three fourth of the amount in case of the price up to fifty
thousand rupees and at least half of the price in case the hire
purchase price is more than that amount.
(6) In case the owner of goods terminates the hire purchase
contract in contravention of sub-Section (5), the person
taking on hire or the person providing guarantee shall be
relieved from all liabilities to be fulfilled according to the
hire purchase contract and he/she shall be entitled to refund
the entire amount paid for hiring the goods by him/her.
Provided that he/she shall have to return the goods taken on
hire to the concerned owner.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section(5),
restriction to terminate the contract shall not be deemed to have
hindered in any manner the right of the owner of the goods to
make a claim for the hire purchase price to be received from the
person taking on hire according to the hire purchase contract.
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the owner of the goods may terminate the hire purchase
contract entered into with the person who does not make
available the information referred to in Section 662 and if any
loss or damage is caused to such goods, the owner may make
claim the same as well.
664. Rights of person taking on hire in case of forfeiture of goods:
(1) In case of forfeiture of the goods given on hire by the owner
of the goods pursuant to clause (a) of sub-Section (4) of Section
663, the person taking on hire shall be entitled to refund the
amount paid for the hire purchase price until the day of
forfeiture and the amount equal to the price of the goods on the
date of forfeiture from such person.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "the price of
goods on the date of forfeiture" means the amount to remain
having deducted the following amount from the amount that may
be recovered from the sale of the forfeited goods:-
1) Reasonable expenses incurred while forfeiting the
goods;
2) Reasonable expenses incurred for storage, repair and
maintenance of the goods;
3) Reasonable expenses incurred while selling or
transferring the goods in any other manner;
4) The amount paid as taxes, charges, fees or dues if
unpaid for the goods by the person taking on hire
according to the laws in force.
(2) The amount referred to in sub-Section (1) shall be paid to
the person taking on hire within thirty days of the date of
forfeiture of the goods and while making payment thereafter,
an interest at the rate of ten percent per year shall also have
to be paid.
665. Status of the Goods on Hire in case person taking on hire
becomes Bankrupt:
(1) In case any court decides at a time while the hire purchase
contract is in force that the person taking on hire has become a
bankrupt or is likely to be a bankrupt according to the laws in
force for the time being and as a consequence thereof, the
liquidator or any other equally competent person taking control
of the property of such person shall exercise the rights and
fulfill the obligations as the person taking on hire with regard to
the goods concerning the hire purchase contract.
In case the person taking on hire is subject to bankruptcy
and the proceedings concerning it is under consideration by a
court, the liquidator or the person exercising the rights equal to
the liquidator pursuant to sub-Section (1) may, having obtained
approval of such court, handover the goods concerning the hire
purchase contract to any other person in any manner whatsoever
and in case such goods has been handed over in such a manner,
the person receiving the goods shall exercise the rights and
fulfill the obligations as the person taking on hire under the hire
purchase contract.
666. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -14
Provisions Concerning Wages
667. To Employ in work: (1) Any person who has attained the age of
at least fourteen years may be employed in a work with his/her
consent.
Provided that the person who has not attained the age of sixteen
years may not be employed in hazardous business or work.
While employing any one pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
provisions of this Chapter have to be followed or cause to be
followed.
668. Wages to be paid: (1) While employing anyone in any work
pursuant to Section 667, the person who employs him/her in the
work shall have to pay wages in proportion to the work except in
the cases where one agrees to be employed in the work on
his/her own without a wage.
While paying wages pursuant to sub-Section (1), if any
particular rate of wage is specified with the agreement between
the person employing in work and the person employed in work,
it shall be paid accordingly and if no such rate is specified, the
wage shall be paid according to the rate prevailing in the place
of work.
Except otherwise agreed upon between the persons
employing in and employed in work pursuant to sub-Section (1)
or (2), the wage shall be paid upon completion of the work.
While determining the wage according to this Section, the
wage shall be determined on the basis of each day of work
except otherwise agreed upon between the persons employing in
and employed in the work.
669. Provisions of Safety Measures to be made: While employing
anyone in any work, the employer shall have to make the
provisions of adequate safety measures to prevent the possible
risk or danger according to the nature of such work.
670. Working hours not to be more than eight hours: (1) While
employing any one in a work under this Chapter, normally one
may not be employed in work for more than eight hours a day.
(2) In case one is employed in work for the period more than as
referred to sub-Section (1), the consent of the person to be
employed in work shall be obtained and while employing
him/her in the work, eight hours shall be regarded as one day
and for every hour of extra work, the extra wage shall be paid in
the same proportion.
671. Special Provisions Concerning Domestic Helper: (1) While
employing any one as a domestic helper, the person who
employs him/her in work shall have to abide by the following
terms and conditions as well:-
The wages to be paid having determined the wage in
monthly or annual basis;
Foods to be provided for three times viz. at morning,
afternoon and evening and clothes to be provided to
wear as are suitable to the weather according to
capacity of the person who employs in works;
Facilities of using appropriate housing and toilet to
be given according to one's capacity;
In case one is less than eighteen years old and he/she
wishes, provision to be made for studies at
appropriate time having regard to household works;
Provision of treatment to be made in case of illness;
Provided that the expenses to be incurred in the
course of treatment may not be deducted from
his/her monthly or annual wage amount.
Not to employ in work at the time of illness and in
other time as well, not to employ in works that
he/she could not do due to his/her age, capacity, or
condition;
In case of death, the expenses to be incurred in
performing the obsequies rites to be borne by the
person who employs him/her in work;
Not to commit degrading or inhuman treatment or
sexual harassment,
Not to remove from work without a reasonable
cause;
To abide by the additional terms and conditions
agreed upon between the domestic helper and the
person who employs him/her in works.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (2) of

Section 670, the provisions of the said Section shall not be
applicable while employing a domestic helper in works.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "a domestic
helper" means a person who is employed in household works on
the condition that he/she may be employed in the works at any
time as may be necessary.
672. Assigned works not to be left incomplete: (1) No person shall
have to leave the work taken to complete or undertaken to
complete without completing it except on reasonable grounds.
In case any one leaves the work incomplete as referred to
in sub-Section (1), the person leaving the work shall bear the
liability therefor.
673. Wages to be paid to the worker: (1) The wages to be paid for
employing in works shall be paid to the person who is employed
in the work or to any other person with his/her consent.
In case the worker dies prior to payment of wages
pursuant to sub-Section(1), the wages he/she is entitled to shall
be paid to his/her nearest successor.
674. Limitation: A person aggrieved on any matter under this
Chapter may file a case within a period of three months on
which the cause of action arises with regard to matters provided
for in Section 671 and within a period of thirty five days with
regard to other matters.

Chapter-15
Provisions Concerning Indirect or Quasi-Contracts
675. Obligation to arise from indirect or quasi-contract: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter 2 of this Part, in
case any certain, lawful, voluntary and unilateral act that may
create juridical relationship, is done, it shall be deemed to be an
indirect or quasi-contract.
(2) In case an indirect or quasi-contract is resulted pursuant to
sub-Section (1), an obligation under this Chapter shall be
created from the same fact.
676. If other’s property managed voluntarily, not to be deserted
(negotiorum gestio): In case any person manages or operates
the business or property of any other person on his/her own
without information to, or authority from, that person; such
business or property shall not be deserted so long as the business
or property continuous to exist or without handing it over to
such a person or his/her successor or representative or until such
a person substitutes him/her.
677. Damage to be paid for negligence of property taken: (1) In
case any person takes property of anyone else for taking care or
management, he/she shall have to take care and manage the
property in good faith as if that is his/her own property.
(2) In case the person who takes the property pursuant to sub Section (1) causes loss or damage with malafide intention by
negligence, he/she shall pay compensation therefor.
678. Not absolved from obligation by delegation of authority:
In case any one has been entrusted with an obligation to do any
act from him and in case he/she delegates his/her all or any
authority to a third person without prejudice to the obligation
towards such a person, he/she shall not be absolved from his/her
obligation for the reason of delegation of the authority.
679. Carriers of goods may protect and save goods: (1) In course
of transportation of any goods, there occurred a natural disaster
or an accident whereby such goods could not be transported to
the specified destination and thereby, the goods is going to be
perished or its price or quality is going to be materially
diminished, the person who undertakes to transport such goods
may sell the goods even without approval of the owner of such
goods.
(2) In case such goods sold pursuant to sub-Section (1), the
person transporting such goods shall pay such amount to the
owner of the goods.
680. Carriers to bear obligation: In case any goods is stolen, lost,
damaged before such goods is delivered to the concerned person
after its transportation by a carrier of such goods, the carrier
shall be liable for it.
Provided that in case such goods is lost, damaged or destroyed
because of a natural disaster or an accident, the carrier shall not
be liable.
681. Reasonable costs to be paid for saving property at the time
of natural calamities: In case any person saves or protects any
property at the time of occurrence of natural calamities such as
fire, flood, landslide, storm, earthquake without information to
its owner, the owner of such goods shall have to reimburse the
reasonable expenses incurred to save or protect such property.
682. Reimbursement may be claimed: (1) Though any person is not
compelled under a law to fulfill any obligation, if he/she fulfills
the obligation in his/her own expense or for any other reasons,
and thereby any other person gets anything or benefit for that
reason, the person fulfilling such obligation may claim for
reimbursement from the person getting such thing or advantage
in such a manner.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case the obligation has been fulfilled for any unlawful objective,
such reimbursement may not be claimed.
683. Amount of rearing a person may be claimed: In case anyone
has rears any person without information to the person who is
under an obligation to rear such a person, the person rearing in
such a manner may claim an amount from the person under the
obligation.
Provided that in case he/she rears the person out of compassion
or gratification or with an intention not to make a claim of the
amount for rearing, such an amount cannot be claimed.
684. Heir to reimburse funeral expenses: Where a person dies and
any third person performs the funeral acts of the deceased
according to his/her rites, traditions and culture without
information to the successor or close relative of the deceased
person; and if the person claims the expenses incurred while
performing such acts, the nearest successor and in his/her
absence, the close relative shall have to reimburse the amount
incurred therefor.
685. Rearing expenses of person of unsound mind to be borne by
relative: In case the person under an obligation to rear or take
care of a person of unsound mind, a person with physical
infirmity or any helpless minor having no income of his/her own
denies to rear such a person and if any third person rears or
takes care of him/her, such a person may claim for
reimbursement of the expenses incurred therefor from the person
who is under such an obligation.
686. Expenses of treatment to be paid: In case any person meets
with an accident or he/she is seriously ill and any person, other
than his/her successor living in the same family, relative or
close person, conducts or causes to conduct treatment of such a
person voluntarily, the successor, relative or close person shall
reimburse the expenses incurred while conducting treatment in
such a manner.
Provided that in case the treatment is conducted or caused to be
conducted without an intention to claim the reimbursement, the
expenses need not to be reimbursed.
687. Expenses of Public Bodies to reimburse: Whoever does not
voluntarily follow the necessary measures of health and safety
measures required to be followed according to law for protection
of body, life or property of his/her own or of general people and
because of the same, any government or public body follows or
causes to follow such measures, the person shall have to pay
reasonable expenses incurred for that purpose even if he/she
does not agree to follow such measures.
688. Amount paid by person having stake to reimburse: Where a
contract is concluded to pay by any other person an amount to
be paid by one person according to law but he does not pay it, if
the person who has to pay according to law pays the said amount,
he/she shall have to reimburse.
689. Price or Remuneration to pay: In case any person gives
anything or orders to do any work to any other person, he/she
shall have to pay the price of the thing or remuneration
according to the work.
690. Price of goods or services to recover: Where any goods or
service has been made available to any person who is
incompetent to enter into a contract according to law or to the
person who is responsible to take care of such person, the price
of such goods or service may recovered from the person
receiving such goods or service.
691. Property in custody to be kept as Bailment: Whoever keeps
into his/her custody property of other's that could be kept
according to law shall have to keep such property as a bailment.
692. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter16
Provisions Concerning Unjust Enrichment
693. Unjust Enrichment to be deemed: (1) In case any person
acquires anything or any benefit for the reason of doing an act
or fulfilling an obligation by any other person, the person
receiving such thing or benefit is said to have acquired an unjust
enrichment.
The unjust enrichment referred to in sub-Section (1) shall
deemed
acquired
following
circumstances:-
In case there is an increment in one’s property or
decrease in liability;
In case one acquires services from other or cause
some one to do the work.
In case another’s assets is used.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1) or
(2), in case anyone acquires movable or immovable property or
any advantage or benefit in any manner whatsoever, except in
the following circumstances, he/she shall be deemed to have
acquired unjust enrichment:-
Any movable or immovable property or any
advantage or benefit may be acquired from any
person under a law or contract;
The person from whom any movable or immovable
property or any advantage or benefit is acquired; it
is acquired on free consent without returning back or
reimbursing it.
(4) In determining whether or not and to what extent a person
obtains an enrichment under this Chapter, no regard shall be had
to any disadvantage or loss caused thereby to such a person after
the enrichment.
(5) The person who acquires unjust enrichment according to this
Section shall bear the obligation according to this Chapter.
694. Matters not to be taken, if taken, to be returned (solutio
indebiti): In case any person takes or receives under mistake
anything which he/she has not to take or receive, he/she shall
have to return the thing to the person from whom he/she has
taken or received the thing.
695. Debt paid under mistake to be refunded: In case any person
pays a loan to anyone under a mistake that he/she is indebted to
him/her and which is not to be paid, the person receiving such
amount shall have to refund such amount if he proves that such
amount is not required to be paid.
696. Goods or amount taken with malafide intention and benefit
thereof to be returned: (1) In case any person receives with
malafide intention any amount or goods in which he/she has no
ground to claim, he/she shall have to return such amount or
goods and the interest to be charged on such amount or the
advantage or return to be accrued from such goods from the date
of receiving such amount or goods to the date of its return.
In case the amount or goods received pursuant to sub Section (1) is lost or damaged for any reason whatsoever, he/she
shall have also to pay the compensation therefor.
697. Debt paid by third person to be paid: In case a debt liable to
be paid by a person is paid by a third person without his/her
knowledge, the debt he/she has paid shall have to be paid to the
person who has paid the debt.
698. If Tax payable is paid by another person, reimbursement
may be claimed: In case a tax payable by a person is paid by
any other person, the person paying the tax may claim
reimbursement thereof from the person who in under a duty to
pay it.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, “tax” means any
type of government fee, tariff, duty, fine and the word also
includes local taxes as well.
699. Goods found may be kept giving information to police: (1) In
case any person finds any goods in any manner, he/she may,
having given a notice thereof to the police, safely retain such
property along with him/her until the concerned owner is traced
The concerned owner shall have to bear the expenses
incurred for tracing out the owner of the goods and retraining
the goods as referred to sub-Section (1) and unless the expenses
are paid, the person receiving the goods may retain the goods.
In case no person makes or claim on the goods retained up
to three year pursuant to sub-Section (1), the goods belongs to
the person finding the goods.
700. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of two years from
the date on which the cause of action arises.

Chapter -17
Provisions Concerning Torts
701. Torts deemed to be committed: (1) No person shall cause loss
or damage in any manner to any one's person, life or property or
legally protected right or interest by way of a default,
recklessness
negligence
omission
himself/herself or of anyone to whom one has to bear the
obligation according to this Chapter.
In case parties do not have a pre-contract relationship as to
the act or omission as referred to in sub-Section (1), the loss or
damage to be caused as a result of such an act or recklessness
shall be regarded as to have committed a tort.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter, "omission" means
a condition in which one has not carried out what he/she is
supposed to carry out.
(3) In case of commission of a tort pursuant to sub-Section (2),
one who commits the tort shall have to pay compensation.
In case the tort committed pursuant to sub-Section (2) is
caused due to anyone’s own omission, default, negligence or
recklessness, the quantity of compensation shall be less.
702. Parents to be liable for loss or damage caused by minor: For
a tort caused by a minor who has not attained the age of
fourteen years, the father, mother living along with him/her or if
there is no father or mother, the person exercising maternal or
paternal authority over him/her shall bear the liability thereof.
703. Guardian to be liable for loss or damage caused by a person
of unsound mind: For the loss or damage caused by a person of
unsound mind, his/her guardian shall be liable and accordingly,
she/he shall bear the liability.
704. Employer to bear liability: (1) For the loss or damage caused
by a domestic helper while being employed by anyone as in the
capacity of a domestic helper, the person employing him/her in
the work shall be liable and accordingly, he/she shall bear the
liability.
(2) While bearing the liability referred to in sub-Section (1), the
person employing him/ in work may deduct the amount from the
remuneration, allowance or facilities which the domestic helper
is entitled to.
(3) In case any loss or harm is caused to anyone by an act
carried out in good faith in the course of doing such act by a
worker or employee engaged by an employer, the person, firm,
company or organization engaging him/her in the work shall
bear the liability.
705. Owner of Animal to be liable for loss or damage caused by
Animal: For the loss or damage caused to any one by the
animal kept by, or under the control of, a person, such an owner
of the animal shall bear the liability.
Provided that the owner of the animal shall not be liable in cases
where the loss or damage is caused at the time while the owner
of the animal had kept the animal in control in appropriate
manner having adopted adequate protective measures according
to behavior of the animal or the loss or damage is caused due to
any act, default or recklessness of the person who has suffered
the loss or damage.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "animal" means a
domestic animal or wildlife or avian of any type under one's
control and the word also includes a domestic, reptile or wild
avian as well.
706. House owner to be liable for loss or damage caused by
collapse of House: In case a house as a whole or any part
thereof collapses at the time of construction or at any time upon
completion of its construction and it causes any loss or damage
to any one, the concerned house owner shall bear the liability
thereof.
707. Owner of Property to be liable: In case any of the following
incidents happens for the following reasons and any one suffers
a loss or damage therefrom, the concerned property owner shall
bear the liability thereof:-
(a) In case a machine, equipment or engine explodes for not
adopting safety measures in appropriate manner according
to its nature;
(b) In case of firing or explosion occurred for not adopting
safety measures in case of any inflammable or explosive
materials in appropriate manner according to its nature;
(c) In case any industrial enterprises produce excessive smoke
and sound contrary to the prescribed parameters;
(d) In case of falling down or causing to fall down of trees on
any highway, road, street, way except for natural disaster
or by an act of third person.
(e) In case of disposition of dirty or toxic matter or matter
spreads
communicable
diseases
canals,
waterways pipes or sewerage openly without adopting
precautionary measures in an appropriate manner in
contravention of the set norms.
708. House Head to be liable: In case anyone suffers loss or damage
because of mishandling of waste materials and garbage of any
type from any house, the concerned house head shall bear the
liability thereof.
Explanation:
For the purpose of this Section,-
(a) "House" means a house or shed and the word includes a
structure of a house.
(b) "House head" means the person working as the main
person in a family and also includes the person working as
the main person in case of living on rent in a house of
someone else.
709. Liability of Trespass to be borne: The person who commits
trespass shall bear the liability for the loss or damage caused
due to trespassing movable or immovable property of any one.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, "trespass" means
unlawful entry into, taking possession of products, unauthorized
damage to, intervention in or unlawful encroachment on the
property that is under the entitlement, procession or ownership
of someone else in case of an immovable property; and forcibly
taking into custody, take away, to take the advantage arising out
of, or causing obstruction or hindrance in the use of the property
under the entitlement, possession or ownership of somebody else
in case of a movable property and the word also includes the act
of taking control of any type of movable or immovable property
in an unlawful manner.
710. Liability to be borne jointly: In case an act that is deemed as a
tort under this Chapter has been committed by more than one
person, each of the persons shall be jointly and severally liable
to the degree of the tort committed for the loss or damage
caused due to such an act.
711. Compensation to be paid for liability: (1) While bearing
liability for a tort committed under this Chapter, the person who
commits the tort shall have to pay compensation.
(2) The compensation shall be confined to the matter of actual
loss or damage and fictitious or unreal compensation shall not
be payable.
The compensation may be of any type in the form of cash,
kind or service.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, a claim of compensation may not be sustained in case
the loss or damage is caused due to a default, recklessness or
negligence of any other person or that of the victim’s own.
Provided that in case the other person causes loss or damage
because of his/her default, recklessness or negligence, it may not
cause hindrance to claim for compensation for such loss or
damage.
712. No
Liability
separate
provision:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, in case a
tort for which a liability is to be borne under this Chapter is
treated as criminal offence under a law or a separate provision
or provision of a separate legal remedy is made with regard to
such tort in this Code or other law, the liability under this
Chapter shall not be borne.
Subject to sub-Section (1), in case it is proved that the tort
for which liability is to be borne under this Chapter is not found
to be committed due to malafide intention, recklessness,
negligence, default or omission of the person who is said to have
committed such a tort, but it is committed for any other reason,
he/she shall be absolved from the liability to be borne for such
tort.
713. Limitation: The person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of six months from
the date on which the cause of action arises.
Chapter – 18
Provisions Concerning Liability for Defective Products
714. To be Liable for Defective Products: (1) No person shall sell,
distribute, or cause to be sold or distributed any goods or service
having produced them defectively.
In case the sale or distribution of the product referred to in
sub-Section (1), causes a loss or damage to a body, life or
property of any one, the producer shall be liable for that under
this Chapter.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Chapter,-
(a) "Defective Product" means a goods or service which
has not the minimum measures of safety that a common
person reasonably expects it to have while consuming
any product, for any of the following reasons:-
(1) Defective design, manufacturing, processing
or installation;
(2) Defective packing, protection or storage;
(3) Defective presentation;
(4) Lacking adequate measures or precautions to
control the potential risk or danger according
to nature of the produced goods or service, as
the case may be.
(b) "Producer" means the producer who finally produce,
sells and distribute the defective goods or service
and also includes the following persons:-
(1) The distribution or seller in case the producer
could not be traced out,
(2) In case of an imported goods, the importer
who imports defective goods or the distributor
or seller who sells or distributes such goods.
(c)"Goods" means an industrial product to be consumed
by public-in-general
715. Claimant to prove that Product is Defective: Whoever claims
that damage is cause to his/ her body, life or property due to
consumption of any goods or service for being defective, he/she
shall have to prove the relationship of such defective goods and
the damage in question and that the damage is caused only due
to consumption of such product.
716. To be relieved from liability: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 714, the producer shall not have to bear the
liability in case any of the following fact is proved:-
(a) He/she has not produced, imported, sold or distributed
the defective product;
(b) The goods or service he/she sold or distributed was not
defective at the time of sale or distribution or it became
defective after sale and distribution;
(c) The goods or service he/she has produced is not in sale
or distribution or not sold
(d) The loss is caused due to consumer's failure to comply
with the directives to be complied with while consuming
the produced goods or service;
(e) The loss is caused because the consumer has not properly
consumed the product in a manner which should not have
to be consumed;
(f) Absence of scientific or technical knowledge at the time
of production or distribution of the goods or service that
such goods or service was defective;
(g) While selling the product, from which the loss in caused,
it was informed that it may cause loss if it is not
consumed properly;
(h) In case any goods or service is consumed having the
knowledge or there being reasonable ground to have the
knowledge that it may cause loss or damage.
717. Degree of liability may be reduced: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in case it is proved that the
loss is caused due to the person producing the defective goods
and also due to the person who suffers from the loss both, the
liability of the producer may be reduced proportionally.
Provided that in case the third party suffers from the loss or
damage due to such loss, the degree of liability may not be
decreased in the case of such a party.
718. Products not deemed to be defective: Goods or service may
not be deemed to be defective only for the reason that the goods
or service of higher quality than the goods or service which a
person has consumed are available in the market.
719. No Adverse Effect on Other Rights: Nothing provided for in
this Chapter may cause an adverse effect on the right, interests
or claim available under a law or contract to the person who has
suffered from loss in body, life or property because of the
defective product.
720. Limitation: A person aggrieved from an act carried out under
this Chapter may file a case within a period of one year from the
date on which the cause of action arises.

Part -6
Provisions
Concerning Private
International Law

Part -6
Provisions Concerning Private International Law
721. Provision of this Chapter to Apply: (1) The provisions of this
Chapter shall apply on any matter relating to private legal
relationship involving a foreign element.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-Section (1), the
said provisions shall, particularly, apply on the following
matters:-
a) Legal status of a foreigner and his/her capacity;
b) Matters relating to marital relationship, paternal
and maternal and other family relationship or
partition of property, inheritance at least one of
the related parties of which is a foreigner or
matters relating to the activities concerning
thereto done in abroad;
c) Matters relating to movable or immovable
property located in abroad in which at least one
of the stakeholder parties is a foreigner;
d) Matters relating to right or liability concerning
contractual or non-contractual in which at least
one party is a foreigner; or
e) Matter relating to a contract concluded in abroad.
Explanation:
(1) “Foreign element” means a situation in
which a foreigner, foreign object or an act
carried out in abroad is involved.
(2) “Foreigner” means a foreign natural person
or corporate body and the word also
includes a foreign state.
722. Legal capacity of Foreigner to be Determined: (1) Legal
capacity of any foreigner shall be determined according to the
law of the country of citizenship of such person.
(2) In case citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to
sub-Section (1), his/her capacity shall be determined according
to the law of the country of his/her habitual residence, and
even if such residence could not be determined, according to
the law of the country where he/she is residing for the time
being.
(3) While determining legal capacity or legal status of any
corporate body, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country where it is registered, in case the country of
registration could not be ascertained, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where the Headquarters of
such a body is located and in case even such country could not
be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country where the place of transaction of such a body is
located.
723. Presumption of disappearance or death of a foreigner: (1) In
case a presumption of disappearance or death of a foreigner has
to be made, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of citizenship of such person.
(2) In case the citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to
sub-Section (1), it shall be determined according to the law of
the country of his/her habitual residence, and if such residence
could not be ascertained, according to the law of the country
where is his/her residence immediately before he/she is
disappeared or dead.
724. Successor to be determined according to foreign law: While
determining the successor in case property of a foreigner
residing in Nepal goes intestate, the successor shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his/her
citizenship, if such country could not be determined, it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of his/her
habitual residence, and even if such residence could not be
ascertained, according to the law of the country where he/she is
residing for the time being.
725. Determination of Succession of Deceased: (1) In case the
succession is opened because of death of any foreigner in Nepal
and thereby a successor is to be determined for the property
located in Nepal, it shall be determined according to the law of
the country of citizenship at the time of death of such a person.
(2) In case the law could not be ascertained pursuant to sub Section (1), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his/her habitual residence at the time of his/her death,
and if even such residence could not be ascertained, it shall be
determined according to the Nepal law.
726. Testamentary Will to be determined according to the law of
the country of citizenship: (1) The capacity of conclude a
testamentary will to amend to and revoke it or form of such a
will shall be determined according to the law of the country of
citizenship of the person concluding such a will at the time of
concluding, amending to or revoking such will.
(2) If the citizenship could not be ascertained pursuant to subsection (1), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of habitual residence and even if such law also could not
be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of
his/her residence for the time being.
727. Determination
Nature
Corporate
Body: While
determining whether a company, foundation or any other
corporate body is public or private entity, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where such a company,
foundation or corporate body has been incorporated and if such
a law could not be ascertained, it shall be determined according
to the law of the country where the registered office or
Headquarters of the company, foundation or corporate body is
located.
728. Regulation
Movable
Immovable
Property: (1)
Regulation of the succession to the movable property shall be
according to the law of the country of habitual residence of the
deceased at the time of his/her death.
(2) Regulation of the succession to the immovable property shall
be according to the law of the country where such property is
located.
729. Nepali Citizen to Follow Nepali Law while marrying in
abroad: (1) A Nepali citizen shall, while marrying in abroad,
have to meet the capacity, qualifications and conditions for
marrying as specified in the law of Nepal.
(2) The formality to be followed while solemnizing a marriage
pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall be according to the law of the
country where the marriage is solemnized.
Provided that while solemnizing a marriage at the Nepali
Embassy or Consular General Office in abroad, formality
according to the Nepal law shall be followed.
(2) The marriage solemnized in contravention of sub-Section (1)
or (2) shall not be recognized in Nepal.
730. Foreigner to follow the terms and conditions of law of own
country: (1) While marrying in Nepal by foreigners or by a
foreigner and a Nepali citizen, every person entering into the
marriage shall have to abide by the conditions as to the capacity,
qualifications and other matters as set out in the laws of their
respective countries.
(2) The formality to be followed while solemnizing a marriage
in Nepal pursuant to sub-Section (1) shall be according to the
law of Nepal.
Provided that while solemnizing a marriage at foreign Embassy
or Consular General Office in Nepal, formality according to the
law of the concerned country shall be followed.
731. Consequences of Marriage to be according to law of one’s
own country: (1) The matrimonial relationship after the
marriage and the consequence of the marriage shall be
determined according to the law of the country, if both of them
belong to the same country and in case such country is different,
it shall be determined according to the law of the country of
their habitual residence and even if such a country is also
different, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of their residence for the time being.
(2) In case the consequence of the marriage could not be
ascertained pursuant to sub-Section (1), it shall be determined
according to the law of the country of their marriage.
732. Paternal Authority to be regulated by the law of the country
of citizenship: (1) The relationship between father, mother and
children including paternal authority shall be regulated by the
law of the country of citizenship of the children.
(2) In case the law referred to in sub-Section (1) is not
ascertained, it shall be regulated by the law of the country of
habitual residence of the parents and even if such law is not
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of their residence.
733. Relationship between the person adopting a child and
adopted child shall be according to law of the country of
citizenship: After adopting a son or daughter, the relationship
between the person adopting a son or daughter and the adopted
son or daughter shall be regulated by the law of the country of
citizenship of the person adopting a son or daughter; and if no
such law could be ascertained, according to the law of the
country of habitual residence of the person adopting a son or
daughter; even if such law could be ascertained, it shall be
determined according to the law of the country where they are
passing normal marital life.
734. Determination
Guardianship
Curatorship:
Guardianship or curatorship of a minor or person with unsound
mind shall be determined according to the law of the country of
citizenship of such a minor or person with unsound mind.
(2) In case the country referred to in sub-Section (1) could be
ascertained, it shall be determined according to the law of the
country of his/her habitual residence and even if such country
could not be ascertained, it shall be determined according to the
law of the country of habitual residence for the time being.
(3) The relationship between a guardian or curator and the
person under the guardianship or curatorship as the case may be
shall be determined according to the law of the country of the
guardian and curator or where he/she is appointed as the
guardian or curator, as the case may be.
Provided that in case the habitual residence of the person under
the guardianship or curatorship is Nepal, it shall be determined
according to the Nepal law.
735. To determine on the basis of the law of the country of
residence: (1) While regulating the matters concerning
separation of bread and bed, it shall be regulated according to
the law of the country of habitual residence of the married
couple.
(2) While regulating the matter pursuant to sub-Section (1), in
case the country of habitual residence of the couple is different,
it shall be regulated according to the last country of their
habitual residence and in case even such country could not be
ascertained, it shall be regulated according to the law of the
country in a court of which the case of alimony is sub juice.
736. Dissolution of Marriage in Abroad to be recognized:
Dissolution of a marriage between Nepali citizens or between a
Nepali citizen and a foreigner effected in abroad shall be
recognized in Nepal in accordance with Nepal laws if such a
dissolution is made according to the law of the state where the
marriage is dissolved and such a dissolution may be enforced.
737. Content of ownership to be determined as per the law of the
country where property is located: (1) The content of
ownership or possession of movable or immovable property
shall be determined according to the law of the country where
such property is located.
(2) The situation leading to maintenance or end of ownership
over immovable property shall be determined according to the
law of the country where property is located.
738. Goods to be regulated according to law of destination: The
goods on transit in the course of transportation shall be
regulated by the law of the destination of such goods.
739. Law of Contract to be as determined by parties: (1) The
governing law of any contract shall be as determined in the
contract by the parties to it.
(2) In case no law is determined pursuant sub-Section (1), it
shall be governed by the law of the country where such a
contract is to be performed and even if such country could not
be ascertained, it shall be governed by the law of the country
where the contract has been concluded.
Provided that a contract concluded in Nepal shall be governed
by the law of Nepal.
740. Deed entered into in abroad to be recognized: The validity of
a contract or a deed concluded outside Nepal shall be
determined according to the law of the country in which it is
concluded and such a contract or a deed shall be deemed to be
lawful if it is duly concluded under the laws of the state where it
has been concluded and it shall be recognized in Nepal.
741. Regulation by the law of the country of donor: (1) The matter
of validity of a donation or gift shall be determined according to
the law of the country of citizenship of the donor at the time of
donation or gift.
(2) If formality has been completed according to the law of the
place of the country where donation or gift has been given, it
shall be regarded that donation or gift was duly given.
742. Determination of liability for Tort: (1) While determining
liability for an act which is deemed to be a tort according to the
law involving the foreign element, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country where the act has been
committed.
(2) In case the act referred to in sub-Section (1) originated in
one country and the consequence of such act appears in another
country, the liability shall be determined according to the law of
the country where the consequence appears.
(3) In case no liability could be determined pursuant to sub Section (2), it shall be determined according to the law of the
country where the act to be regarded as tort has been committed.
743. Liability under Quasi-contract or unjust enrichment: The
liability under a quasi-contract or unjust enrichment shall be
determined according to the law of the country where such an
act has been happened.
744. Other matters to be determined according to private
international law: While determining any matter that is not
dealt with in this Chapter involving foreign element, it shall be
determined according to provisions of Nepal law if there is
separate provision with regard to such a matter and if no such
provision has been made, it shall be determined according to the
recognized principles of private international law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-Section (1), in
case all parties of the relevant subjects agree to determine the
matter referred to in sub-Section (1) according to Nepal law, it
may be determined according to such a law.
745. In case of double citizenship, law of habitual residence to
apply: (1) While determining the law as provided for in this
Chapter to determine according to the law of the country of
citizenship, if a person is having citizenship of two or more
countries at a time, his/her citizenship shall be determined
according to the law of the county of his/her habitual residence.
(2) In case such matter could not be determined according to the
law of the country referred to in sub-Section (1), it shall be
determined according to the law of the country of citizenship
having closest connection.
Provided that in case of person having Nepali citizenship or a
person having habitual residence in Nepal or a non-resident
Nepali citizen, it shall be determined according to the Nepal law.
(3) In case the reference of sub-Section (1) is with regard to a
refugee or a stateless person, it shall be determined according to
the law of the country of his/her habitual residence and in case
even such a law could not be determined, it shall be determined
according to the law of the country of his/her residence for the
time being.
746. Approval may be granted for proceedings of a case by a
Foreign Court: (1) If a case which is under consideration of a
court of Nepal, the parties of which are foreigners, if both
parties of such a case submit a joint petition to the court
specifying reasons that it would be appropriate and practicable
for that case to be resolved by a foreign court of the residence to
which the parties belong, and in case it is found reasonable upon
an inquiry on the petition, the court may grant approval to
initiate proceedings of the case by the foreign court according to
the demand of the parties to the case.
(2) Once an approval is given with regard to a case by the court
pursuant to sub-Section (1) to initiate proceedings by a foreign
court, no proceedings shall be adjudicated again by a court of
Nepal in the same matter.
747. Case filed in a court of Nepal may be suspended: In a case
where foreigners are parties and which is under consideration by
a court of Nepal and in case the parties of the case submit a
petition requesting for suspending proceedings of the case
because judgment in the case by the court of Nepal is likely to
have direct impact in the decision of the case pending at the
other country, the court may suspend the proceedings of such a
case until the case between them pending in abroad is decided.
748. Court of Nepal to Have Jurisdiction: A court of Nepal shall
have the jurisdiction to adjudicate proceedings and to decide a
case in any dispute arising out of the following matters:-
A matter between the foreigners who reside within
Nepal or between a foreigner and a Nepali citizen
that is related under this Code or other law;
A matter in regard to a case when a foreigner
residing in Nepal is a defendant;
A matter in regard to the succession of a foreigner
who resides in Nepal having property at the time of
death;
A matter concerning payment to be made within
Nepal in a financial transaction or deal made in
abroad between a Nepali citizen and a foreigner;
A matter concerning property that is located in
Nepal between foreigners or a foreigner and a Nepali
citizen;
A matter concerning a contract concluded in or to be
performed in Nepal between foreigners or to which
at least one party is a Nepali citizen;
A matter concerning tort, quasi-contract or unjust
enrichment committed outside Nepal where both
parties or the opposite party are Nepali citizens or
foreigners who have habitual residence in Nepal;
A matter to be adjudicated by a court of Nepal under

Section 721.
749. Other matters concerning case may also be heard by the
court of Nepal: In any case in which the principal dispute
involving a foreigner to be resolved by a court of Nepal is being
heard under its jurisdiction, if it seems that other matters
concerning the case have also to be resolved, the court may
resolve the matter accepting its jurisdiction in such matters as
well.
750. To be according to Treaty: In case otherwise provided for on
any matter dealt with in this Chapter in a treaty to which Nepal
is a party, nothing provided for in this Chapter shall have any
affect on that matter.
751. Not applicable if against public order: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, in case it becomes
against public order while implementing any of the provisions
referred to in this Chapter, in such circumstance, the provisions
of this Chapter shall not be applicable.
(2) In case a circumstance arises as referred to in sub-Section
(1), the matters referred to in this Chapter shall be regulated
according to other linking criteria and if no such criteria could
be determined, such matters shall be regulated according to the
Nepal law.
Annex-2
THE CIVIL
PROCEDURES
A Bill Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Civil
Procedures
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to make the civil procedure simplified
and timely, by amending and consolidating the prevailing laws relating to
procedures on filing, proceedings, hearing and settlement of civil cases, and
other procedures pertaining thereto, and the execution of decisions made on
such cases,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Constituent Assembly pursuant to
clause (1) of Article 83 of the Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the
"Civil Procedure Code, 2010"
This Code shall commence on the fourteenth day of the
month of April of the year 2011.
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in
this Code:
"Court" means the Supreme Court, Appellate Court or District
Court, and also includes any other judicial body or authority
empowered by law to try and settle civil cases of any specific
type.
"Law" means the law in force for the time being;
"Endorsement" means an order made by the concerned officer
of the court on the reverse side or any other part of a document
or on a separate paper, that cannot be filed pursuant to law,
setting out the grounds and reasons for not filing the document
and putting his/her signature thereon.
"Civil case" means a case relating to a legal right, status,
position, family relation and property, other than a case defined
by law as a criminal case, and also includes a case on any of the
following matters:
matters relating to establishment relationship or divorce,
matters relating to fees, remuneration, salary, allowance,
wages, compensation,
matters relating to partition, succession, donation and gift,
testamentary will, guardian, curator, maternal and
paternal authority, adoption,
matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
under any contract, quasi-contract or unjust enrichment,
matters relating to any right, claim or compensation
relating to tort, quasi-tort or defective product,
matters relating to servitudes,
Matters relating to any other right or liability of civil
nature.
"Judge" means an authority of the court who tries, hears and
settles a case, and also includes the authority competent to try,
hear and settle any specific type of civil cases.
"Memorandum of appeal" means a petition, accompanied by
own pleas, made by a person who is not satisfied with a
decision of the lower court to the higher court for the correction
of such a decision.
"Statement of defense" means a written statement admitting or
rebutting the claims set forth in the plaint and submitted to the
court, and also includes deposition equivalent to the statement
of defense.
"Counterclaim" means a claim made by a defendant on the
claim made by a plaintiff.
"Defendant" means a person who submits a statement of
defense, and also includes a person who makes a deposition as
if he/she were a defendant or a person who has been set by the
court as a defendant.
"Plaint" means a complaint, suit, claim or petition praying for
the establishment of one's right, interest or concern on any
matter or the execution of one claim, and also includes a
deposition equivalent to a plaint or a counterclaim set forth in
the statement of defense.
"Case-file" means a file that records a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and proofs and
evidence and other documents as collected.
"Case" means a civil case.
"Summons" means a notice or summons issued by a court in the
name of any person in the course of proceedings on a case.
"Plaintiff" means a person who makes a plaint and also includes
a person who submits a counter-claim, as well.
"Local body" means the village development committee or
municipality, as the case may be.
"Property" means a movable or immovable property.
Matters set forth in separate law not to be affected: (1) The
provisions set forth in several procedural laws made on several
matters shall govern such matters, and nothing contained in this Code
shall affect such matters.
This Code shall apply to the procedures not set forth in
the laws as referred to in sub-section (1).

Chapter-2
General Principles of Civil Procedure Code
Principles to be followed in civil cases: In trying, hearing and
adjudicating, the courts shall generally follow the principles and
provisions set forth in this Chapter.
Hearing to be held in open bench: Except as otherwise provided for
in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court on a petition by a
party of a case, cases shall be tried, heard and adjudicated in open
bench.
Hearing to be held by competent court: A case shall be tried, heard
and adjudicated by a competent court in accordance with law.
Question of entitlement to be adjudicated by court only: If there
arises a question of entitlement or disentitlement on any matter, such a
question shall be settled by a regular court only.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Code, the expression
"regular court" means the District Court, Appellate Court or Supreme
Court.
Dispute relating to legal status to be settled by court: (1) A dispute
relating to settlement of relationship, divorce or legal status of any
person shall be adjudicated by the regular court only.
If it appears, in the course of proceedings of a case, that
the other matters should be tried, heard and adjudicated only after the
settlement of the question of entitlement, and a case is sub judice in
any other court or body, the court shall order the parties to obtain
settlement of the question of entitlement from the regular court.
Status of parties to be equal: (1) In trying, hearing and adjudicating
a case, the status of parties to the case shall equal.
The court shall treat each party equally.
If, in the course of proceedings of a case, the
Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person is present
before the court as a plaintiff or defendant, except as otherwise
provided for in law or except as otherwise ordered by the court, the
Government of Nepal, any body thereof or any legal person may not
claim any separate status, facility, concession, immunity or exemption,
in the course of proceedings of cases.
Locus standi to make plaint: A person who desires to make a claim
by filing a plaint in any court, the person shall show his/her locus
standi by mentioning in the plaint the matter that he/she has right to
make such a claim or demand or has legitimate interest or concern
therein or therewith.
Jurisdiction not to be in vacuum: (1) A court or judicial authority as
specified by law to try, hear and adjudicate any case shall have the
jurisdiction to try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
If no court is specified to have jurisdiction pursuant to
sub-section (1), the concerned district court shall be deemed to have
jurisdiction to originally try, hear and adjudicate such a case.
Prohibition on avoidance of decision making: (1) A judge shall
avoid making decision on the ground that law is inadequate or unclear.
In the event of occurrence of the circumstance as referred
to in sub-section (1), decision shall have to be made based on
recognized principles of law and justice.
Opportunity to be given for compromise or mediation: (1) Prior to
passing a judgment on any case, the court shall have to give
opportunity to the parties to compromise such a case or enter into a
compromise by following the procedures of mediation.
If, in giving opportunity pursuant to sub-section (1), if
the parties agree to enter into compromise or undergo the procedures
of mediation, the case shall be capable of being settled through
compromise or mediation, irrespective of the level trying the case.
Principle of res judicata to be followed: In hearing and adjudging a
case, the same court shall not make hearing and pass a judgment more
than once in the case on the same matter involving the same plaintiff
and same defendant.
Right of appeal: Where any case has been originally tried, heard and
adjudged, a party who is not satisfied with such a judgment shall have
the right to make an appeal against such a judgment to the appeal
hearing court from the court that has made such a judgment, in
accordance with law.

Chapter-3
Provisions Relating to Jurisdiction
Jurisdiction to be specified: (1) In order to try, hear and adjudicate a
case, the court shall have jurisdiction to that effect pursuant to law.
Any proceeding, hearing or adjudication made in the
course of a case by a court without jurisdiction shall be void.
In passing a verdict, the court shall have to specify in the
judgment the matter of under which law it has jurisdiction.
Jurisdiction of court: The court shall have powers, as provided for in
law, to try, hear and settle cases, hear appeals therefrom, revise or
review them.
District court to have jurisdiction: (1) In relation to the cases
relating to any immovable property, to servitudes, ditches and borders,
requiring an on-site examination or inquiry by the nature of the
subject-matters of cases and any cases requiring the examination of
any land, house or place in view of plaints, the district court of the
district where such land or house is located shall have jurisdiction to
try, hear and settle such cases.
The concerned district court shall also try, hear and
adjudicate the following matters, in addition to the cases set forth in
sub-section (1):
A case involving the question of rent, crop or amount in
question or relating to the ownership, possession of or
entitlement, disentitlement to a property,
A case relating to attachment to or preemption of an
immovable property,
Division of an immovable property,
A case relating to furnishing an immovable property in
security, mortgaging, possessing and foreclosing such
property,
A case relating to any concern or condition on an
immovable property,
A case relating to compensation related with an
immovable property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), a partition case shall be tried, heard and settled by the district
court of the district where the defendant is residing.
District court of district where defendant resides or act done to
have jurisdiction: (1)
Any case other than those set forth in

Section 18 shall be tried, heard and settled by the district court in
which plaint is filed, out of the district court of the district where the
act is done or the district court of the district where the defendant
resides.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"district where the defendant resides" means the district where the
defendant has abode and also includes, in the case of a legal person,
the district where the head office of such a person is situate.
If both plaintiff and defendant do any general transaction
in any place within Nepal, other than the territory where the plaintiff
and the defendant reside, a case relating to such transaction shall be
tried, heard and adjudicated by the district court in which plaint is
filed, out of the district court in the territory where the transaction has
been done or the district court in the territory where the plaintiff
resides.
In filing a case of the matter as referred to in sub-section
(1), if there are two or more defendants, the case shall be filed in the
district court of the district where more defendants reside.
Provided that where the number of defendants residing in more
than one district is equal, the plaint may be filed in any district court
of the district where such defendants reside.
Jurisdiction over cases relating to transaction carried on abroad:
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 18 and 19, where
there a provision that a case on the matter of general transaction or
contract done or concluded abroad may be filed in any court in Nepal,
the district court of the district where the plaintiff or the defendant
resides shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Jurisdiction over transaction done abroad Nepalese aircraft and
ship: The court of Nepal shall, subject to Section 20, have jurisdiction
to try, hear and adjudicate a case on any transaction done abroad a
Nepalese aircraft or ship, registered in Nepal in accordance with law,
while such an aircraft or ship is outside Nepal.
Higher court to have jurisdiction: If a case is filed in both lower and
higher courts on any matter falling under the jurisdiction of the lower
court and the higher court pursuant to law, the higher court shall have
the jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Court to have jurisdiction: If a case of any matter is filed in both a
court and other quasi-judicial body in accordance with law, the court
shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case.
Jurisdiction over case in which public servant is plaintiff or
defendant: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, while lodging a plaint by a public servant in his/her official
capacity or by a person against a public servant in such capacity, such
a plaint shall be lodged in the district court of the district where the
office in which such a public servant is in service for the time being.
In making a plaint or submitting a statement of defense
by a public servant in his/her personal capacity, the public servant
may, in fulfillment of the requirements of laws in force, make or
submit the same to the district court of the district where he/she in
service.
The court shall file a plaint or statement of defense
tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section (2) and forward the same to
the concerned district court.
The concerned court shall try, hear and settle the case
forwarded pursuant to sub-section (3), in accordance with law.
Concerned district court to have jurisdiction: Where any court is
not specified by law to have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle any
case, the concerned district court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear
and settle such case.
Plaint to be maintained in one court only: (1) If a person has filed
several plaints on the same matter in several courts, the case shall be
maintained in any one district court with the consent of both parties of
the case, and information thereof shall be given to the rest courts.
If information is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
courts shall annul such plaints.
If the parties fail to agree pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint which has been filed earlier in the court shall be maintained,
and the plaints filed in the other courts shall be annulled.
Jurisdiction of court hearing appeal: If a case is filed in, and tried,
heard and settled by, any court in accordance with this Chapter, the
court hearing appeals against the orders or judgments made by such a
court shall have jurisdiction to try, hear and settle appeals, as provided
for in law.

Chapter-4
Provisions Relating to Preparation of Deeds
Requirement to be met in preparing deeds: (1) In
preparing
deed, it shall be so prepared, clearly setting out the matter on which it
has to be prepared, by printing, typing or hand writing that it does not
contain any errors and overwriting and cross-out and it has to be
signed by the actor or authority concerned with that deed.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter,-
The expression "deed" means any of the following deeds:
A deed on any kind of general transaction carried
on household, transfer of a movable or immovable
property or on mortgage or pledge of a property,
A contract,
A deed of authorization, power of attorney, deed of
consent or other paper of similar nature,
Any deed to be submitted to a government office
or corporate body,
Any kind of deed, including a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition and
petition, to be submitted to the court,
Any deed to be issued by a government office or
corporate body,
Any other deed of similar nature.
The term "actor" means a person who has responsibility
by the contents of a deed to sign the deed.
The term "government office" means a court, office of
the Government of Nepal, constitutional body, an office
receiving or involving budget or grant from the
Government of Nepal, or a local body.
The expression "corporate body" means a body and
company that is fully or partly owned by the Government
of Nepal, and includes a university and community
school.
If, in preparing a deed as referred to in sub-section (1), an
error is made or contents are to be corrected for any reason, correction
shall be made by so crossing out the sentence, word, figure or letter
that has to be corrected that such a sentence, word, figure or letter
seems to have been otherwise and writing such a sentence, word,
figure or letter as required to have been mentioned over or under the
cross-out, and the concerned actor shall sign each place where such
correction is made.
If correction cannot be made by way of cross-out
pursuant to sub-section (2) or despite that such correction can be made,
the corrected content would create confusion or doubt, another
separate deed shall be prepared instead of such a deed.
In setting down any amount in a deed as referred to in
sub-section (1), the amount shall be set down in both figures and
words.
If, in setting down any amount pursuant to sub-section
(4), there is a difference between the figures and the words, the
contents set down in the words shall be valid.
Requirements to be met while signing deeds: (1) In signing a deed
or causing it to be signed, a person who can write shall write his/her
name and sign it, and a person who cannot write shall put his/her
thumb impressions on it.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
signing any of the following deeds, a person who can write shall put
both of his/her signature and thumb impression on it and a person who
cannot write shall put thumb impressions on it and make signature in
such a manner as to prove that such a deed has been executed and
signed by the actor:
A deed related with the transfer of title to, gift, donation,
pledge or mortgage of, a movable or immovable property,
Power of attorney/authorization letter to be submitted to
a government body or body corporate,
A deed of partition, will, exchange to be executed
between coparceners,
A deed of separation of bed and board or joining of bed
and board to be executed between coparceners,
A deed relating to adoption,
A separate receipt executed upon receiving repayment of
loan, without making an endorsement on the reverse side
of a bond,
A deed of loan, pledge, mortgage and also sub-mortgage,
deed of term of repayment, guarantee letter and bond,
Bailment contract,
Unsecured bond (Kapali).
In signing, pursuant to sub-section (1), a deed to be
issued by a government office or corporate body shall be signed by
the concerned authority indicating his/her name and designation, and
such a deed shall also contain the date of its issued.
Requirements to be met while putting signature on deeds: (1) A
person who can write shall have to write his/her full name, surname
and address in a deed, and sign the deed.
In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), the other
places may be initialed by putting the full signature on the principal
pace of signature.
In putting signature pursuant to sub-section (1), if a deed
of the same matter contains more than one page, the actor shall be
required to sign it shall so initial the top and bottom of each page that
no content can be added to or deleted from the deed and put the full
signature on the principal place of signature.
If any deed is affixed or joined, the actor shall initial each
joint and place of such affixation or joint.
Requirements to be met while putting or causing to be put finger
impressions on deeds: (1) In putting or causing to be put finger
impressions on a deed, the person putting finger impressions on the
deed shall put impressions of the thumb in his/her right hand on the
deed.
In putting or causing to be put finger impressions
pursuant to sub-section (1), if the person putting finger impressions
has no thumb in the right hand or despite having such a thumb, the
wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear, the person
shall put the impression of thumb in the left hand, if the person has no
thumb in both hands or despite having them, the wheel like and conch
like marking therein are not clear, the person shall put impression of
another figure having clear marking, in the right or left hand, on the
deed, setting out the same reason.
In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs in
both hands in accordance with law, if the actor has no thumb of any
hand or the conch like marking therein are not clear, the actor shall
put impression of such another finger in the same hand as having clear
marking and the thumb of the hand, in which wheel like and conch
like marking therein are clear.
In putting or causing to be put impressions of thumbs of
both hands, the actor shall put the impression of any one such figure
each in the both hands as in which the wheel like marking and conch
like marking are clear if the actor has no thumb in both hands or
despite have the same, the wheel like marking and conch like marking
therein are not clear.
In putting, or causing to be put, finger impressions
pursuant to sub-section (4), if one hand has no figure at all or despite
have any figure, the wheel like marking and conch like marking are
not clear, the impression of any such one or two fingers, as required,
in the same hand as wheel like marking and conch like marking in
which are clear shall be put, or caused to be put, on the deed.
Except where the impression of any one thumb or both
thumbs is caused to be put while putting, or causing to be put, thumb
impressions pursuant to this Section, in putting, or causing to be put,
the impression of any other figure, the matter that the impression of
other figure has been put or caused to be put for the reason that the
actor has no such a thumb or the wheel like and conch like marking
therein have not appeared clear shall be set down in the concerned
deed.
Signature to be put: If in relation to a deed on which the impressions
of the thumbs of both hands and signature of the actor who is to put
thumb impression have to be put or on which the finger impressions
and signature of the actor have to be put in accordance with law, the
finger impressions cannot be put on the deed owing to the
circumstance set forth in Section 31, and the actor can make signature
in writing, the actor shall put or cause to be put only his signature in
writing on the deed, and the deed shall contain the matter that figure
impression could not be put on the deed for the reason that the actor
has no figure in both hands or despite having one, the wheel like and
conch like marking therein are not clear.
Deed to be valid: Where a deed is signed or on which finger
impression is put on it, such a deed shall be valid for any purpose and
enforced in accordance with law.
Deed to be caused to be signed by guardian or curator: (1) In
signing a deed or causing it to be signed by an actor in accordance
with law, if the actor is not able to make signature pursuant to Section
30 and, in putting or causing to be put figure impressions on the deed
pursuant to Section 31, the actor has no figure in both hands or despite
having one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not
clear, a person who can be a guardian or curator of such an actor shall
put signature on the deed on behalf of, and in the presence of, that
actor in accordance with law.
In signing or sealing a deed or causing it to be signed
through a person who can be a guardian or curator pursuant to subsection (1), the deed shall contain the matter that the guardian or
curator has signed it on behalf of, and in the presence of, that actor for
the reason that the actor has no figure in both hands or despite having
one, the wheel like and conch like marking therein are not clear.
Procedures to be fulfilled in executing deed by person who is not
able to seal it: (1) If a person who is not able to seal a deed by
putting finger impressions on it for the reason that he/she has no
finger in both hands can make signature, the deed certifying authority
shall cause him/her to put his/her signature only on the deed and
certify the deed, stating that mater in any part of the top of the deed.
In executing a deed by a person who is not able to seal
the deed by putting on it the figure impression by the reason that
he/she has no finger in both hands and who is not also able to make
signature, the deed shall be certified, in witness of his/her wife or
husband living in an undivided family and, failing such a person, in
witness of the guardian or a person who has the first and foremost
right in the order of priority to inherit him/her, setting down in it the
reason which the figure impression and signature of the deed
executing person have not been put on it.
Requirements to be met in executing deed on behalf of persons of
special group: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, in executing a deed on behalf of a blind or dumb, it shall
be executed in presence and witness of a person who can be his/her
guardian living in an undivided family or failing such a guardian, a
person who can be his/her curator, stating that the deed corresponds to
what has been expressed or gestured by such a blind or dumb.
In submitting any deed to a government office or
corporate body or preparing deeds such as a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal or petition, such a deed shall be filed
or submitted, by getting it certified to that effect by the chief of the
office or body to which such a deed is to be produced or by a person
authorized by the chief to that effect.
Identification details to be set down: (1) In preparing the deeds
referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deeds shall be
prepared clearly setting down the identification details of the main
actors related with the deeds.
In setting down the identification pursuant to sub-section
(1), there shall be set down the three-generation details of the
concerned person, namely his/her father's, mother's, grand-father's and
grand-father's name, his/her wife's or husband's name, his/her
citizenship number, age, date and district of issue of the citizenship
certificate, his/her permanent address, and in the case of such a person
being a foreign citizen, details of his/her citizenship, his/her passport
number, country of issued of passport and date of issue of passport,
his/her address and email address.
In executing a deed in presence of a guardian or curator
pursuant to this Chapter, there shall be set down in the deed the
guardian's or curator's name, surname, address, citizenship number,
and in the case of such a guardian or curator being a foreign citizen,
his/her passport number and email address.
Details of body corporate to be mentioned: (1) In executing or
causing to be executed any deed on behalf of a body corporate, the
deed shall mention details clearly identifying such a body, its
registration number or place of registered or head office and shall be
signed, or cause to be signed, by the person authorized to that effect
by a resolution of the directors thereof.
In getting the deed to be signed pursuant to sub-section
(1), the person to sign the deed on behalf of such a body shall not be
required to put finger impression on the deed.
Provided that upon the deed being signed, the seal of such a
body shall be affixed thereunto.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of

Section 29, in the case of a deed of which a body corporate is the actor,
it shall not be required to mention the description of three-generation.
Only signature to be sufficient: Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Chapter, in signing any deed by any public officebearer in that capacity, by an office-bearer of a body corporate in that
capacity, in preparing a report of any study, or research, examination
or inquiry or signing or sealing any deed other than a deed required by
law to bear finger impressions, the finger impressions shall not be
required to be put thereon, and if the deed is duly signed by the
concerned person, such a deed shall be deemed to have been duly
executed.
Seal to be put in indelible ink: (1)
In putting or causing to be put
finger impressions pursuant to this Chapter, the wheel like or conch
like figure shall be colored in indelible ink or otherwise and shall be
impressed on the deed.
In putting signature by a person required to make it, the
person shall put the same in indelible ink.
Place and date to be set down while preparing deed: In preparing a
deed as referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 29, the deed shall
contain the main contents thereof and state at the end the place and
date of execution of such a deed.
Deed to be witnessed: (1) A deed required to be prepared in witness
of persons pursuant to law shall be prepared in witness of at least two
persons who are competent to enter into a contract and state that the
act, transaction as referred to in the deed have been carried out.
A deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter shall state the
details setting out the identity and address of witnesses as mentioned
in sub-section (1) and be signed or sealed, or caused to be signed or
sealed, pursuant to this Chapter.
If a deed prepared pursuant to this Chapter has been
written by the actor himself or herself, the deed shall state that matter
and if it has been drafted by another person, it shall state that matter
and signed by the writer, indicating his/her identity.
If any license has to be obtained in accordance with law
in order to prepare a deed, the writer preparing the draft pursuant to
sub-section (3) shall also state the details thereof.
Deed failing to meet requirements to be invalid: (1) A deed
prepared without fulfillment of the requirements pursuant to this
Chapter shall not be valid, and no right, claim, interest or concern of
any person shall be enforced by such a deed.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
deed may be recognized in the following circumstance by imposing a
fine not exceeding two hundred rupees in view of the nature of the
deed.
Where a person who can write has not put finger
impression but has put signature duly or where the person
has put finger impression but the impression is not
legible,
Where a person who can write has not put signature but
has put finger impression only,
Where the deed at its end containing the date is not
signed or sealed by the actor,
Where a deed is not witnessed or despite being witnessed,
it does not bear the signature of the witness,
Where the name, surname, address and designation have
to be set down, any or all of the surname, address and
designation has or have been omitted.
Deed executed by actor to be valid: Notwithstanding anything
contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is proved that a deed
required to be signed by the actor has been hand written by the actor
himself or herself, such a deed shall be valid in accordance with law.
Deed may be registered upon making addition legibly: (1) If some
addition and cross-out is made and contents added in legible manner
in a deed tendered for registration in a government office or body
corporate, in getting it to the signed, there shall be made a remark in
the deed that such addition and cross out have been made or letters
added therein and certified to that effect and then the deed shall be
registered.
In the case of a deed written by a government office or
body corporate and tendered for registration, the chief of such office
or body or the person authorized by the chief may sign it and register
If any deed does not meet the requirements pursuant to
sub-section (1) or (2) and cannot be registered, the chief of office or
body shall, for the reasons why the deed cannot be registered to be
clearly recorded, write such reasons on the reverse side of the deed,
date and sign it and return it, by getting a receipt from the person
tendering it for registration.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no document registered or filed in a government office or
body corporate shall be returned to any one nor shall it be exchanged
nor shall any figure, letter be deleted, crossed out or altered.
Copies of deeds to be provided: (1) If any person who has concern
in a case or his/her law practitioner makes a petition for a copy of a
document contained in the case-file including the plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal, petition, deed related with the
evidence produced by the plaintiff or the defendant and the judgment,
the court shall provide it as soon as possible.
Provided that any law practitioner may obtain a copy of a
judgment.
Except as provided for in sub-section (1), any person
who is concerned with any deed maintained with a government office
or body corporate may make a petition, setting out the matter that the
person is concerned with the deed, to the concerned government
office or body corporate for a copy of the deed.
In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
there shall be charged the fees of five rupees per page of A-4 size
where the concerned person himself or herself has copied a deed or
made a photocopy of the same and the fees of ten rupees per page of
A-4 size where the court or other government office or body corporate
has itself made a copy and provided it.
In providing a copy pursuant to sub-section (3), the
matter that the copy has been provided at the request of the person
who has applied for the same and the copy corresponds to the original
shall be mentioned on the first page of the copy and the copy shall be
certified by the competent authority.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the concerned court, government office or body corporate
shall not be compelled to provide the copy of a deed that has to be
kept confidential or that has not to be made public pursuant to law or
that has been ordered by a court not to be made public.

Chapter-5
Provisions Relating to Limitation
Plaint to be made within limitation: (1)
If any certain period of
time is specified by law to make a plaint in, or submit any kind of
claim, to any court on any matter, such a period of time shall be
deemed to be a limitation.
Where the limitation is provided for pursuant to subsection (1), a plaint shall be made within such a limitation.
If any person shows up in the court to make a plaint in
contravention of sub-section (2), his/her plaint shall not be filed, and
even if such a plaint happens to have been filed for any reason, such a
plaint shall be annulled.
Plaint may be made failing provision of limitation: If no limitation
is provided by law for the filing of a plaint on any matter, a plaint may
be made within six months after the date of occurrence of the cause of
action.
Commencement of limitation: (1) If there arises a circumstance to
make a plaint on any case, the limitation shall be deemed to have
commenced in accordance with that law which provides for limitation.
If there is no legal provision in relation to the
commencement of limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
limitation shall be deemed to have commenced from the date on
which the cause of action has arisen.
Plaint may be made from the date of knowledge: (1) Where a plaint
has to be made as a result of deception, forgery, fraud or conspiracy or
for similar other reason or the limitation gets expired in a
circumstance where any act is done clandestinely and it is not thus
known then, and the concerned person shows up to make a plaint
setting out that matter within thirty five days after the date of
knowledge of that matter by him/her, the court shall file and try such a
plaint subject to this Chapter, Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section 48 or 49.
In the case of a plaint to be made by the Government of
Nepal or any body corporate for the purpose of sub-section (1), the
date of knowledge by the concerned office or body corporate shall be
deemed to be the date of knowledge by the plaintiff.
Plaintiff may be filed after leave: (1) If the deadline of limitation
falls on a public holiday and a plaint is tendered for filing on the first
day on which the court opens immediately after such a holiday, the
court shall file the plaint.
If a plaint is filed pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
shall be deemed to have been filed within the limitation.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "public
holiday" means the holiday for whole or half day as notified as such
by the Government of Nepal that the government offices or courts
remain closed on such a day.
Limitation of minor or person of unsound mind: (1) If any person
who has to make a plaint is a minor, the limitation shall be deemed to
have commenced in his/her case from the day on which he/she attains
majority.
If any person who has to make a plaint becomes of
unsound of mind prior to the commencement of limitation, the
limitation shall be deemed to have commenced in his/her case from
the day on which he/she becomes of sound mind.
If any person becomes of unsound mind after the
commencement of limitation, if the person makes a plaint within the
period of limitation that remains after deduction of the period during
which he/she becomes of unsound mind, the plaint shall be deemed to
have been made within the limitation.
Provided that the period of limitation that remains after the
person who was of unsound mind has become of sound mind is less
than fifteen days, the period of fifteen days shall be deemed to be the
remaining term of limitation.
Commencement of limitation of heir: (1) If a minor or a person of
unsound mind who is to file a plaint dies before the minor becomes
major or the person becomes of sound mind, his/her heir may make
the plaint within the limitation from the date on which he/she dies.
If a minor becomes major and then dies, his/her heir may
make a plaint within the remaining period of limitation when the
remaining period of limitation is thirty five days or more, and within
thirty five days if he/she dies when the remaining period of limitation
is less than thirty five days.
If a person of unsound mind becomes of sound mind and
then dies, his/her heir may make a plaint within the remaining period
of limitation when the remaining period of limitation is thirty five
days or more, and within thirty five days if he/she dies when the
remaining period of limitation is less than thirty five days.
Plaint by guardian: Notwithstanding anything contained in Section
52 or 53, if there is a guardian of a minor or a person of unsound mind,
as provided for in law, the guardian may make a plaint within the
limitation as referred to in this Chapter.
Limitation not to be postponed: Notwithstanding that any of the
persons who are to make a plaint jointly is a minor or a person of
unsound mind, the limitation shall not be postponed in the case of the
other persons.
Provided that such a minor or person of unsound mind may
make a separate plaint subject to Section 53 after he/she becomes a
major or a person of sound mind.
Limitation in relation to transaction carried on abroad: If there is
a provision in law or contract that a plaint may be made in any court
of Nepal in relation to any act, action or transaction done or taken in a
foreign country, such a plaint may be made subject to this Chapter as
if such an act, action or transaction were done or taken within Nepal.
Limitation of plaint lodged in court without jurisdiction: If any
person lodges a plaint in any court in accordance with law, it appears
from the statement of defense submitted by the defendant or otherwise
that the court has no jurisdiction to make decision on such a plaint, the
limitation for lodging a plaint by the concerned person shall be
deemed to have commenced from the date on which such a court ends
the proceeding thereon.
Provided that,
Where the court has made a endorsement at the time of
lodging a plaint that it has no jurisdiction, the limitation
for lodging plaint pursuant to this Section shall not be
extended by the reason only that the court without
jurisdiction has proceeded with,
After the court in which a case has been filed knows that
it has no jurisdiction to try, hear and settle the case,
nothing shall be deed to preclude, merely by the reason
that such a court has not settled the plaint, the concerned
person from lodging a plaint in the competent court
within the limitation as provided in law,
Where a plaint is made, lying as to the limitation, after
the expiration of the limitation in accordance with law,
the jurisdiction cannot be established merely by the
reason that the plaint has been filed.
Limitation not to be expired: If the limitation has expired with a
person being unable to file a plaint within the limitation owing to the
existence of the following force majeure event (circumstance beyond
control) and the concerned party tenders a plaint for filing within the
following period, setting out that matter, the court shall,
notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, file and
proceed with such a plaint, subject to Section 59:
If the concerned person himself or herself has to observe
obsequies by the reason of someone's death, seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
completion of obsequies,
If the concerned person is a woman has delivered a child,
thirty days, excluding the time required for journey, after
the date of delivery,
If motor vehicles have not plied because the route has
remained closed because of flood, landslide and snowfall or declaration of curfew or otherwise, ten days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
resumption of such a route or movement of motor
vehicles,
If the concerned person has been abducted or taken
hostage by another person, seven days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of release from
such abduction or hostage taking,
If a divine or natural calamity such as earthquake has
occurred, ten days, excluding the time required for
journey, after the date of occurrence thereof.
Evidence of reason for expiration of limitation to be submitted:
In making a plaint pursuant to Section 50 or 58, the reason for
being unable to make the plaint within the limitation shall be set out in
the plaint or in a separate petition, and such proof or evidence as
required to prove the same shall also be produced.
If a person who is not able to produce a proof or evidence
of the reason why the person has not been able to lodge a plaint within
the limitation at the time of making plaint pursuant to sub-section (1)
makes a request for a time-limit for the production of such a proof or
evidence, the court may give such a time-limit as it deems appropriate,
but not exceeding twenty one days after the date of filing of the plaint,
for the production of such a proof or evidence.
Limitation to commence from date of approval: If any law
provided that approval of any one has to be obtained in accordance
with law prior to making a plaint against any person, organization or
office-bearer, the limitation for making a plaint by the concerned
person on that matter shall be deemed to commence from the date of
notice of such approval received by that person.
Limitation not to be computed pending specification of authority:
If the Government of Nepal or any other body or office-bearer has
authority to specify the authority, court or body to adjudicate a case
under any law and if such authority, court or body is specified within
the limitation, a plaint has to be lodged accordingly, and if such an
authority, court or body is not so specified, a plaint has to be lodged
within a period of fifteen days, under the relevant law, after the date
of specification of such an authority, court or body.
Computing of period of limitation: (1) If the period of limitation is
specified on day counting basis, the number of days so specified shall
be computed on the day counting basis.
In computing days pursuant to sub-section (1), the period
of limitation shall be fixed by reckoning days from the following day
of the day of commencement of limitation.
If the period of limitation is specified in months, the
number of months as so specified shall be reckoned on the basis of the
first day of months irrespective of the days making months.
If the period of limitation is specified in years, the
number of years as so specified shall be reckoned treating a period of
twelve months as one year.

Chapter-6
Provisions Relating to Court Fees
Payment of court fees: (1) In lodging a plaint or memorandum of
appeal to the court and making a counterclaim in the court, the court
fees shall be charged.
Except in the case referred to in sub-section (1), if an
order is made to make a review or revision on a petition made for the
review or revision of any case, the court fees shall be paid for the
review or revision of the case, as the case may be.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term "court
fees" means the fees to be charged while lodging a plaint or
memorandum of appeal or a petition for the review or revision of a
case, and includes the fees payable by a person who makes a counterclaim.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), no court fees shall be charged pursuant to this Chapter in the case
of a case in which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a case to
be heard and adjudicated by a local body in accordance with law or
proceeding to be carried out by a body specified by the Government
of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal gazette.
Case not to be heard without payment of court fees: (1) No person
may lodge a plaint, memorandum of appeal or make counterclaim or
petition for the review or revision of any case without payment of the
court fees charged pursuant to this Chapter nor shall such a plaint,
appeal or petition be entertained.
Except as mentioned elsewhere in this Chapter, a plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition for the review or revision of a case
without payment of the court fees shall be dismissed.
Cases may be heard without collection of court fees: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 64, in the following
circumstance, the judge may, by executing a memorandum with the
reasons, make an order to file a plaint, memorandum of appeal,
counterclaim or review or revise a case, subject to the collection of the
court fees later fully or partly:
If a person who is required to pay the court fees makes a
petition specifying the reason that he/she is not able to
pay the chargeable court fees fully or partly because of
being extremely indigent and the judge has any
reasonable ground to believe that matter,
If it is recommended by the concerned local body that a
person who is required to pay the court fees is not able to
pay the court fees because that person has no property
other than the property subject to the case or if a petition
is made by the person stating that matter, and the judge
has any reasonable ground to believe that matter.
If the judge makes an order to collect court fees later
fully or partly pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned employee
shall clearly write how much court fee has been collected and how
much is outstanding and attach the records thereof with the case-file.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), no court fees shall be charged in relation to a case for the use of a
government or public property.
Price or amount in question of property to be set out: (1) In
making a plaint, the value or amount in question of the property that is
claimed or disclaimed by the plaint shall be clearly set out in cash.
Except in a case set forth in sub-section (1), where only a
claim is made that any matter to be done has not been done or any
matter not to be done has been done or is about to be done, such a
claim shall also be set out clearly.
Where a plaint is made with a claim pursuant to subsection (2) and a decision has to be made allowing the provision of the
value or amount in question subsequently, the court shall, prior to
making such a decision, cause the plaint maker to pay the court fees
according to such a value or amount in question.
Bases for fixation of value or amount in question: For the purpose
of the payment of court fees, the value or amount in question of an
immovable property shall be fixed on the basis of the following order
of priority pursuant to Section 66:
Fees fixed by the land revenue office for the purpose of
registration,
The value fixed, if any, by the Government of Nepal for
the purpose of tax,
Locally prevailing value.
Value or amount in question to be taken as basis while collecting
court fees: In collecting the court fees, the same shall be collected on
the basis of the following value or amount in question:
Where the right in cash has to be established or claim in
cash to be de-established, the figure of the amount in
which the right or claim has to be so established or deestablished,
Where gold or silver has to be provided or claim therein
de-established, the figure to be set by the rate fixed by
the Nepal Rastra Bank, and failing such a figure, the
figure to be set as per the prevailing market rate,
Where a movable property other than that set forth in
clause (b) has to be provided or released, the figure to be
set as per the prevailing market value of that property,
Where a security or treasury bill has to be provided or
claim in it has to be de-established, the value set by the
stock exchange,
In the case of a movable property of which prevailing
market value is not set pursuant to clause (c), the figure
of value or amount in question set by the plaintiff,
Where yields of a land are claimed, the figure of yields of
the previous year not subject to natural calamities,
Where a claim in an immovable property is made or right
or claim in such property has to be de-established, the
figure of value or amount in question as set by the
plaintiff pursuant to Section 66,
Where a claim is made that the yields of land subject to
natural calamities have not been remitted, the figure of
yields claimed for remission,
Where a claim is made for the remission of any thing
other than the yields of a land, the figure of the thing so
claimed for remission,
Where a claim is made for the right of trust, priest,
Bhandere etc. or a claim therein has to be de-established
or a claim is made for releasing therefrom, the figure of
the residual income to be enjoyable upon administering
the functions of the trust and the figure or amount in
question of the land as specified where other claim is
made and the figure of such Khangi income of one year
as may be enjoyed where the land is not specified,
Where right in contract amount is claimed or right or
claim therein has to be de-established, the figure of
contract of such number of years as for which the
contract amount is claimed, and where a claim is made
only for loss in income, the figure of loss in income so
claimed,
In the case of a mortgage of an immovable property, the
figure of the amount in question set forth in the deed,
Where insolvency or date for repayment has to be
effected, the figure of the amount in question indicated
by the debtor,
Where a claim is made for the provision of salary,
allowance or installment, the figure as claimed,
Where a claim is made for compensation for loss of
wages, the figure of the value as claimed,
Where a claim is made for a principal, profit, dividend,
bonus, donation, gift, interest, house or shop rent or any
property, the figure of such a principal, profit, interest,
rent or property,
Where a claim is made for any compensation, the figure
of compensation so claimed,
Where a claim is made for act or recovery to be done or
made pursuant to a contract, the figure of such act or
recovery so claimed to be done or made.
Rate of court fees: There shall be charged the court fees at the
following rate from the value or figure of the amount in question as
claimed pursuant to Section 68 or a claim in which is prayed for deestablishment, in making a plaint:
Two hundred rupees for up to the first two thousand
rupees,
For up to twenty five thousand rupees, at the rate of four
percent for up to the second twenty three thousand rupees,
For up to one hundred thousand rupees, at the rate of
three percent for up to the third seventy five thousand
rupees,
For up to two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
of two percent for up to the fourth one hundred thousand
rupees,
For above two hundred fifty thousand rupees, at the rate
of one percent for any figure whatsoever thereabove.
Court fees to be charged in lump sum: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 69, the court fees of five hundred
rupees shall be charged in a case on any of the following matters and
matters related thereto:
Registration or transmission of a land or cancellation of
such a registration or transmission,
Claim of invoice and receipt,
Claim for invalidation of a deed, deed on repayment date,
guarantee letter, bond, receipt etc.,
Claim for eviction of tenant from a house or land or
claim against such eviction,
Claim on obstruction with the making of a dam, canal or
ditch or carrying of water through such a dam, canal or
ditch or on the use of water in defiance of order,
Claim for keeping an exit, window or door open or
closed, or for making, adding or closing a window, door
or veranda,
Claim for the issuance of an injunction or mandatory
order to refrain, or cause to be refrained, from doing any
act or to cause any act to be done or for the withholding
of such an order,
Determination of full competency, semi-competency or
incompetency of any person,
Divorce,
Settlement of relation,
Demand for judicial declaration of the death of a person
or cancellation of a judicial declaration or claim for
amendment thereto,
Claim for commencement or non-commencement of
insolvency proceeding,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a trustee,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a
guardian,
Appointment or cancellation of appointment of a curator,
Claim for usufruct or cancellation thereof,
Provided that the court fees shall be charged on the basis
of the value, if any, mentioned,
Claim for servitude or cancellation thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the court fees of one thousand rupees shall be charged on the
following cases:
Claim for the ascertainment or provision of a partition
share in the property subject to partition,
Voidance of a deed or document.
Special provision relating to collection to court fees: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 70, the court fees shall
be charged as follows on the following cases:
The court fees pursuant to Section 68 where the right in
any property has to be established or de-established from
the plaintiff's or appellant's pleas,
Where an inventory of property is not submitted along
with a plaint on the partition case and the amount in
question of the property is ascertained as set forth in an
inventory submitted along with a statement of defense or
required by the court, the court fees as per the figure of
such an amount in question,
Where a plaint is made claiming both principal and
interest, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued up
to the date of filing of plaint,
Where the judgment decrees the recovery of interest as
well, the court fees of the figure of interest accrued from
the date of filing of plaint to the date of the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the value or amount in question is set out in any case, the court
fees shall be charged on the basis of the value or amount in question
as mentioned in the other Sections of this Chapter and the court fees
of one thousand rupees shall be charged, subject to Section 70, in any
other case whatever in which the value or amount in question is not
set out.
Value of previous day on which case is filed to be set: (1) In setting
the value of any property for the purposes of the court fees pursuant to
this Chapter, the value shall be set taking as the basis the value of the
property prevailing on the previous day of the day on which the case
is filed.
Court fees chargeable on making appeal: (1) Irrespective of the
level in which an appeal is made in a case in which the value or
amount in question is set out, there shall be charged the court fees at
the rate of fifteen percent of the court fees chargeable while filing a
plaint, up to the extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
In making an appeal at any level in a partition case in
which the amount in question is not set out, there shall be charged the
court fees equal to the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint.
Where an appeal is made to the second layer court
against the appeal judgment made by the first layer court hearing
appeal, there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen
percent of the court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the
extent to which appeal is made upon being unsatisfied.
Court fees chargeable for making review or revision of case:
Where, on a petition made for the review or revision of any case in
accordance with law, an order is made to review or revise the case,
there shall be charged the court fees at the rate of fifteen percent of the
court fees chargeable while filing the plaint, up to the extent to which
the pray is made to have a review or revision upon being unsatisfied.
Payment of court fees, penalty and fine: (1) In making an appeal by
any party of a case against the original judgment or in making an
appeal to the second layer court hearing appeal against the judgment
of the first layer court hearing appeal, there shall be paid the court fees
as held to have been provided by the party to the other party in
pursuance of the judgment.
In making a petition by any party of a case for its review
of revision in accordance with law, there shall be paid the court fees
charged pursuant to the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, if any penalty or fine is imposed on any party of a case
pursuant to the judgment, no memorandum of appeal or petition made
for the review or revision of a case shall be filed without payment of
such a penalty or fine or furnishing of security for the same.
Court fees required to be paid in cash: (1) Except as otherwise
provided for in this Chapter, the court fees shall be paid in cash.
If payment of court fees is made to the court pursuant to
this Section, the concerned employee shall credit the court fees to the
cash book, duly prepare a receipt thereof in duplicate, give one copy
to the person making payment of court fees and retain the other copy
in the concerned case-file.
Shortfall court fees caused to be paid: (1) If it appears, in filing a
plaint or memorandum of appeal, or from the contents of the plaint or
memorandum of appeal, that payment of court fees less than the court
fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter is tendered, the court shall
cause the shortfall court fees to be paid immediately.
(2) If any person, being unable to pay the shortfall court fees
immediately pursuant to sub-section (1), requests for a time-limit, the
court shall give the time-limit to the concerned person to pay the
shortfall court fees within the deadline for making a plaint or
memorandum of appeal if there are seven days to go for such a
deadline, and, if the deadline is of less than seven days, within seven
days.
If, subsequent to the filing of a plaint or memorandum of
appeal, the court comes to know in any manner that there have been
paid or taken the court fees less than the court fees required to be
collected pursuant to this Chapter or if a complaint is made by any
person on this matter and the complaint seems to be reasonable upon
examination of the complaint, the court shall appoint the due date to
pay the shortfall court fees within seven days if the party is on
recognizance and issue a summons to pay the shortfall court fees
within the time-limit of seven days if the party is not on recognizance.
If the party fails to pay the court fees within the period
given pursuant to sub-section (3), such a case shall not be entertained.
To return excess court fees: (1) If, in the course of proceedings of a
case, it is found on a petition by the party or in any other manner that
there have been collected excess court fees from any party, the court
shall return the excess court fees to the concerned party.
If it is found in any manner after the judgment on a case
that there have been collected excess court fees, the concerned party
may make a petition to the concerned court to get such court fees
returned to him/her.
If, in examining the petition received pursuant to subsection (2), the applicant's demand seems to be reasonable, the court
shall return court fees to the applicant.
Complaint may be made on court fees specified by court: (1) A
person who is not satisfied with the court fees specified by the court
pursuant to this Chapter may make a complaint to the judge of the
same court within three days if the payment of court fees has not been
made yet and within seven days prior to the judgment on the case
where the payment of court fees has already been made.
If, in examining the complaint received pursuant to subsection (1), it appears that there have been collected excess court fees,
the concerned judge shall make an order to return the excess court
fees, and the employee who has so collected the excess court fees may
be liable to departmental action.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (2), the
content of the complaint is held to be false, the person making such a
complaint shall be liable to a fine at the rate of fifteen percent of the
figure of the claim against the collection or specification of such
excess court fees.
Punishment for collection or payment of less court fees: (1) The
concerned party may make a complaint to the court where the case is
sub judice about the reduction of the value or amount in question with
intention to pay less court fees.
If, in examining a complaint received pursuant to subsection (1), or in examining the case-file by the court itself despite
that such a complaint has not been made, it appears that the value or
amount in question has been reduced with an intent to pay less court
fees, the court shall fine such a party with fifteen percent of the
reduced court fees and cause that party to pay the shortfall court fees.
If, in examining a complaint made pursuant to subsection (1), the complaint is held to be false, such a complainant shall
be liable to a fine of five percent of the figure as claimed to be
shortfall.
If it appears, from a complaint made by any person or in
any other manner, that any employee of the court has knowingly
collected the court fees less than that required to be collected, the
employee shall be liable to departmental action in accordance with
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
"knowingly" means the failure to collect the court fees pursuant to this
Chapter according to such value or amount in question as appeared
from the contents of the plaint or memorandum of appeal or evidence.
Where the final judgment has been passed on the case in
which less court fees have been collected pursuant to sub-section (4)
or the time-limit for appeal in such a case has already expired and
such court fees cannot be recovered from the concerned party, the
amount in question of the court fees shall be recovered from the
employee who has so collected less court fees.
Forfeiture of court fees: If the plaintiff or appellant loses the case in
which court fees are charged or if, upon proceeding with a petition for
review or revision of verdict, the previous judgment is not upheld, the
fees paid by him/her shall be forfeited.
Proceedings in cases where case is compromised, dismissed or
canceled: (1) In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed upon
full payment of the court fees, the court shall collect half the court
fees for the execution of deed of compromise and return the remaining
court fees to the plaintiff or appellant.
In executing a deed of compromise in a case filed on the
condition of collection of the whole or any of the court fees
subsequently, the court shall execute the deed of compromise only
after collecting the court fees chargeable pursuant to sub-section (1)
from the plaintiff or appellant.
If a case filed upon full payment of the court fees is
dismissed or canceled, the plaintiff or appellant shall not be liable to
any punishment.
If a case is dismissed or terminated, the court fees paid
shall not be returned.
If a case filed on the condition of collection of the whole
or any of the court fees subsequently is dismissed or terminated, the
remaining court fees shall be recovered from the plaintiff or appellant.
Provided that in the case of termination of a case, it appears that
the plaint that should not have been filed by virtue of the contents of
the plaint has been filed, the court fees collected in such a case shall
be returned.
If a case which has been compromised, dismissed or
canceled in fulfillment of the requirements of law is revived for any
reason on a complaint by the party of case and to be proceeded again,
the party on the complaint of whom the case is to be proceeded again
shall again pay the court fees chargeable pursuant to this Chapter to
the court where the case is sub judice.
Recovery of court fees: (1) The winning party of a case in which
court fees have been paid shall be entitled to recover the court fees
paid by him/her from the losing party.
In making recovering of the court fees pursuant to subsection (1), such recovery shall be made according to such amount in
question as held to be recoverable from each of them if there are two
or more defendants or appellants, according to the extent of right or
claim that has to be de-established from them respectively on the
matter of de-establishment of right or claim and on pro rata basis from
the losing defendants or respondents in the other circumstances.
Where a plaint has been filed without payment of some
or whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant wins the case,
the court fees held to be chargeable shall be recovered from the other
party as a penalty or fine.
If the plaintiff or appellant has made a claim of several
matters, the plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover the
chargeable court fees from the other party only according to the extent
of the claim of that matter as held to be sustained.
Where a case has been filed without payment of some or
whole of the court fees and the plaintiff or appellant loses the case, the
chargeable court fees shall be recovered from them.
If a judgment is passed under which the plaintiff or
appellant is entitled to recover the court fees pursuant to this Section
and the defendant or respondent dies prior to the recovery thereof, the
plaintiff or appellant shall be entitled to recover such court fees from
person who succeeds the inheritance of such a defendant or
respondent.
If in passing a judgment on an appeal or a case for review
or revision, the appellant or applicant wins the case wholly or party,
the appellant or applicant shall be entitled to recover from the
respondent such court fees as held to be chargeable on the extent to
which he/she has so won.
Recovery of court fees to be made with priority: In making
recovery of, or collecting, an amount in question, fine, court fees and
other fees or charges in pursuance of judgment, the court shall first
recover or collect the court fees.

Chapter-7
Provisions Relating to Plaint and Presentation of Claims
Claims to be made: (1) In order to have the matter of a claim made
by a person in accordance with law enforced by the court, the person
shall make such a claim to the court.
In making a claim pursuant to sub-section (1), there shall
be filed a plaint by fulfilling the procedures and terms as referred to in
this Chapter.
Plaint may be made on matter which a person has right in and is
enforceable: (1) Except as otherwise mentioned in this Chapter, in
filing a plaint pursuant to Section 85, the plaint shall be filed by a
person making claims only on the matter which the person has right in
and which can be enforced in accordance with law.
If a plaint is prayed for filing in a manner contrary to
sub-section (1), the plaint cannot be filed, and even if such a plaint has
been filed for any reason, it shall be voided, except in the case of a
plain filed under Section 91.
One plaint may be filed: (1) A person may file only one plaint
against another person on the matters despite that there are many
matters of claims of civil nature against such other person.
If, instead of making a plaint in a case in which the same
plaint can be made at the same time, a person files another plaint
subsequently only after considering the consequences of the plaint so
filed earlier, such a plaint shall not be entertained.
Number of plaintiff or defendant not to affect: In filing a complaint
in relation to the claim of any one matter, any one person may file one
plaint against many persons or many persons may file one plaint
against one person.
Plaint to be filed only once: (1) After a person has filed a plaint
against any person on a matter in a court, that person shall not file
another plaint against the same person on the same matter in the same
court or any other court.
If one party files a plaint on any one matter in a court and
the other party files a plaint on that matter in another court or both
parties file separate plaints in the same court, the court shall make an
order to try the case in pursuance of the plaint filed earlier and void
the other plaints.
Provided that in cases where plaints may be and ought to be
filed by both parties in accordance with law, nothing shall prevent the
hearing of both plaints.
Plaint to be filed within limitation: (1) In making a plaint, the plaint
shall be filed within the limitation specified by law for the submission
of claims on the matters as claimed in the plaint.
In filing a plaint pursuant to sub-section (1), the plaint
shall state by what law the limitation, within which it has been filed,
has been specified.
Any plaint tendered for filing in contravention of subsection (1) or (2) shall be endorsed and returned.
Plaint may be filed by any person on dispute involving public
interest or concern: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Code, any citizen of Nepal may, with the leave of
the court, make a plaint on a dispute involving the right, interest or
concern of the Government of Nepal or public interest or concern, as
the case may be.
In order to obtain the leave pursuant to sub-section (1), a
separate petition shall be filed along with the plaint.
Decision has to be made on the leave prayed for by a
petition pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day of the making of
petition.
Plaint may be filed to establish right: If the right of any third party
is also affected as a result of the judgment passed on a case in the
form of dismissal, repeal or otherwise or of the execution of a deed of
compromise in accordance with law, such a person may make a plaint
to void that judgment or deed of compromise and establish his/her
right, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge.
Plaint may be filed on behalf of legal person: (1) In making a plaint
on behalf of a body corporate recognized as a legal person in
accordance with law, the natural person authorized by the decision of
director or directors of such a body for the purposes of making the
plaint shall state that matter in, and make, the plaint.
In making a limitation pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint shall also be accompanied by a copy of the decision of director
or directors made in relation to the making of a plaint.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), in making a plaint on behalf of any office of the Government of
Nepal, constitutional body or its office or court, the plaint may be
made by the office-bearer who acts as the administrative chief of such
an office.
Prohibition on lodging plaint on matter adjudged: (1) After a
judgment is made once on any matter, the same party shall not lodge a
plaint against the same person on the same matter, instead of making
an appeal against such a judgment in accordance with law.
A plaint filed in contravention of this Section shall be
void.
A judgment made in contravention of this Section shall
be void.
Matters to be stated in plaint: (1)
In making a plaint, the plaint
shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-1 and state, inter alia, the
following matters:
Subject matter of the dispute,
Defendant's name, surname and address, and telephone
number, email, to the extent available,
Ground for locus standi to file the plaint under the law,
Matters claimed,
Limitation,
Jurisdiction,
Whether plaint has been filed elsewhere on that matter or
Matter of how the summons/time-limit of plaint has to be
delivered to the defendant,
Evidence, if any, in support of the claims by the plaint.
No plaint made in contravention of sub-section (1) shall
be filed or entertained.
Claims of plaint ought to be clear: (1) In making a plaint, the
plaintiff shall specifically set out in the plaint what and which claim is
made in what and which matter (cause of action) and on the basis of
what and which ground and evidence of such a claim is based and
present his/her claim or demand before the court.
A plaint that does not clearly mention the claim and the
proceeding that has to be taken by the court pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall not be deemed to have met the requirement.
Plaint fees: In making a plaint, the plaint fees of two hundred rupees
shall be charged.
Filing of plaint: (1) If a plaint is tendered for filing, the court shall
examine whether the plaint meets the requirements pursuant to this
Chapter or nor and the proof and evidence set forth therein are
attached or not and file it in the diary book in the form set forth in
Schedule-2 if the plaint meets the requirements and give the
concerned party an evidence of the filing of plaint in the form set forth
in Schedule-3.
In producing the copies of the plaint pursuant to subsection (1) for the purpose of its registration, there shall be produced
two copies if the number of defendant is only one and one copy for
each of the two or more defendants.
Provided that despite the number of defendants living in an
undivided family, only one copy may be produced for such defendants.
In producing more than one copy of the plaint, the
plaintiff shall declare and sign that the copy corresponds to the
original, and the court shall verify the copy with the original.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaint does not seem to meet the requirements, there shall be made an
endorsement on the plaint setting out the reason for failing to meet the
requirements.

Chapter-8
Provisions Relating to Service of Summons
Plaint may be delivered to the defendant: (1) If, while filing a
plaint, the plaintiff wishes to deliver the plaint, accompanied by the
summons, to the person named as defendant in the plaint on his/her
own or through his/her law practitioner, the plaintiff shall state that
matter in the plaint; and if such a provision is made to deliver the
plaint, accompanied by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (1), the
plaintiff shall deliver a copy of the plaint, accompanied by the
summons, to the person named as the defendant within three days
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of filing of the
plaint by the plaintiff.
Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
tendered for delivery to the defendant pursuant to sub-section (1) and
the concerned person so wishes, that person shall receive the plaint,
accompanied by the summons, and where it is so received, it shall be
deemed to have been delivered duly.
Provided that in the case of a legal person, if the plaint,
accompanied by the summons, is so tendered for delivery, such a
person shall receive it.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if,
in delivering the plaint, accompanied by the summons, to a legal
person, it is delivered to the head office of such a person, it shall be
deemed to have been duly delivered to the concerned person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"head office" means the registered office, if any, of a body corporate,
and failing such an office, the main office carrying on the transaction
of such a person.
If the plaint is received pursuant to sub-section (2), the
receiver shall give a receipt in the form set forth in Schedule-4.
Where the plaint, accompanied by the summons, is
delivered pursuant to sub-section (2), the plaintiff or the law
practitioner appointed by him/her shall submit a receipt of the
acknowledgment thereof to the court where the plaintiff has been filed,
within seven days after the delivery of the plaint, accompanied by the
summons.
The time-limit for the submission of a statement of
defense shall be set from the date of receipt of the plaint, accompanied
by the summons, pursuant to sub-section (5).
100. Issue of summons to defendant: (1) Except in cases where the
plaintiff himself or herself has delivered the plaint to the defendant,
the court filing the plaint shall, within three days after the date of
filing of the plaint, issue a summons to the defendant to submit the
statement of defense.
In serving the summons pursuant to sub-section (2), one
copy of the plaint filed by the plaintiff in the court and the evidence
attached therewith shall also be delivered.
101. To give time-limit: (1) If a complaint is lodged, the court shall,
setting out the matter, give a time-limit of twenty one days, excluding
the time required for journey, to the person against whom the
complaint has been lodged to appear in the court to defend in relation
to such a complaint.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in
giving the time-limit to a person who is maintained as the defendant
by the court pursuant to Section 123, there shall be given a time-limit
of seven days, excluding the time required for journey.
102. Summons cause to be served: (1) In issuing the summons by the
court pursuant to Section 101, the concerned officer shall prepare the
summons or notice in triplicate and sign them, affix the seal of court
thereunto and cause the same to be served.
In issuing the summons in the name of the defendant in
any case in which a plaint is filed, provision shall be made to serve, or
cause to be served, the summons, accompanied by one copy of the
plaint to the person living in an undivided family and one copy of the
plaint for each defendant in the case of the other defendants.
The summons/time-limit issued pursuant to Section 101
shall be served by delivering it to the defendant or other person, and
taking a receipt of acknowledgment thereof.
103. Process server to serve summons: (1) The process server shall have
to serve a summons generally within three days excluding the time
required for journey, from the date on which he/she received the
summons from the court.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"process server" means an employee who is responsible or deputed to
serve the summons issued by the court, by delivering the same to the
concerned person.
104. Form of summons: (1) In issuing a summons by the court in the
name of a defendant in accordance with law, it shall be issued in the
form set forth in Schedule-5.
In issuing a summons by the court in the name of a
person other than a defendant, it shall be issued in the form set forth in
Schedule-6.
105. Summons deemed to have been served: (1) If summons issued by
the court is delivered to the concerned person at any time pursuant to
this Chapter or delivered to his/her address or is brought to his/her
knowledge in any other manner in accordance with this Code, the
summons shall be deemed to have been served.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
the person receiving the summons appears in the court and makes a
petition to receive it in person, the summons shall be delivered to
him/her in the court, and where the summons is so delivered, the
summons shall be deemed to have been duly delivered.
106. Procedures relating to service of summons: (1) A court shall have
to prepare a summons in triplicate and deliver the same to the process
server.
If the summons server personally knows the concerned
person, he/she may, mentioning that matter, deliver the summons
received by him/her pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned
person at any place.
If the concerned person is not found pursuant to subsection (2), the summons server shall go to the address of his/her
residence, find out his/her house, rented house and identify the
concerned person and deliver the summons to the concerned person in
presence of the concerned ward chairperson or member or secretary or
any other employee of the ward committee of the concerned local
body and at least two local persons and obtain a receipt thereof,
indicating the date of service.
Where the person to whom the summons has been issued
cannot be found, the summons/time-limit shall be delivered to any
other major person living with him/her in an undivided family in
pursuance of the procedures referred to in sub-section (3).
Where the concerned person or any major person living
with him/her in an undivided family is not found or, albeit found,
refuses to receive the summons, the summons shall be served by
affixing it to the house or homestead of that person, conspicuously, in
presence of the persons as referred to in sub-section (3), and setting
out that matter in the summons.
In pursuing the procedures referred to in sub-sections (2),
(3), (4) and (5), there shall be mentioned on the reverse of the
summons to be submitted to the court which procedure has been
followed to serve the summons by delivering or posting, along with
the date and time of the service of the summons, and the persons
referred to in sub-section (3) shall be caused to clearly sign it at the
time of delivery or posting.
The summons server shall sign the copy of the summons
served pursuant to sub-section (6) and submit it to the court, along
with a report thereof.
Where a summons has been served by affixing it to the
house or homestead pursuant to sub-section (5), the summons server
shall mention the date and time of service thereof on the third copy of
such a summons and deliver it to the concerned local body and take a
separate receipt thereof or the member or secretary or employee of the
concerned local body shall mention that matter on the reverse of the
service and sign and serve it.
Where a summons is delivered pursuant to sub-section
(8), the concerned local body shall affix such a summons to its notice
board.
(10) Even though a copy of the summons affixed to the house
or homestead pursuant to this Section has not been delivered to the
concerned local body or the local body has not affixed the summons
received by it to its notice-board, the summons shall be deemed to
have been served in accordance with law if it has been duly affixed to
the house or homestead of the concerned person pursuant to subsection (5).
(11) Where a summons is to be served on any body corporate
or legal person in relation to any case, the summons shall be served on
the person acting as principal person for the time being at the
registered office, head office or main office of transaction of such a
body or person.
Provided that if such a principal person is not available, the
summons may be served by delivering it to any office-bearer or
employee serving in such an office of such a body or person.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"person acting as principal person" means the chief executive office of
a body corporate, and this expression means and includes the
chairperson, vice-chairperson, managing director, executive director,
general manager of such a body or the company secretary of a
company.
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (10),
in serving a summons in the name of a government office,
constitutional body or court, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to the chief, administrative chief of such an office or any
office-bearer entrusted with such responsibility or an office-bearer
acting for him/her and by delivering the summons to such an office,
body or court, setting out that matter, if any such office-bearer is not
available.
(13) In serving a summons in the name of a government
office, constitutional body, court, body corporate or such an officebearer or employee in that capacity, the summons shall be served by
delivering it to such an office, body, court or such an office-bearer,
employee or office of such a body corporate.
(14) If a summons cannot be served pursuant to sub-sections
(10), (11), (12) and (13), the concerned summons server shall give a
report to the concerned court within three days.
(15) If a report is submitted pursuant to sub-section (14), the
concerned court shall make an order to serve the summons through
postal service on such an office, body, court or body corporate or its
office-bearer or employee in that capacity.
(16) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (15), the
concerned court may serve the summons in the name of the office,
body, court or body corporate or its office-bearer or employee in that
capacity by sending a registered letter containing that matter.
(17) After a return receipt of the summons sent by post
pursuant to sub-section (16) is submitted to the court, the summons
shall, except as otherwise proved, be deemed to have been duly served.
(18) Where records of houses or block numbers of the persons
residing within the area of any local body have been maintained
systematically or where such persons have consented to the service of
a summons by the court by post in relation to their transaction,
business or any other matter, the court may so serve the summons,
notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section.
(19) If a person is an office-bearer or employee of any
government office, constitutional body, court or body corporate and a
summons issued in the name of that person cannot be served pursuant
to sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5), the concerned court may, based on
the report of the concerned summons server, make an order to serve
the summons on such a person in accordance with sub-section (13) or
(15).
(20) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (19), the
summons shall be served on the name of the concerned person in
accordance with that order.
(21) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the party and opposite party of a case have provided for
their respective address of exchanging electronic notice such as email
and fax to give notice to each other in relation to any document, the
concerned matter or transaction or send a summons in relation to a
dispute, the summons may be served through an electronic notice to
such address.
(22) If the summons server submits to the concerned court a
report that a summons could not be served in the name of the
concerned person despite following the procedures set forth in various
sub-sections of this Section and the court considers that the contents
of the report are reasonable, the court may make an order to serve the
summons in the name of such a person by publishing it in a daily
newspaper of national circulation.
(23) If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (22), the
summons shall be served in accordance with that order.
(24) The concerned person shall bear the expenses incurred in
the service of the summons by publishing it in a daily newspaper of
national circulation pursuant to sub-section (22).
107. Summons may be served in the court itself: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 104 or 105, a summons issued by any
court in the name of the following person, by delivering it to such a
person in the court in the following circumstance:
If the employee or office-bearer of the concerned court is
in attendance, while he/she is in the court,
If a party is on recognizance in any other case in the
concerned court, when such a party appears in the court,
If there is an attorney representing any party of a case
that is sub judice in the concerned court, when the
attorney appears in the court in the course of such
representation,
If the person is a law practitioner who appears in the
concerned court in the course of law practice, when
he/she appears in the curt in the course of such practice,
If the person is one who appears as a witness, when
he/she appears in the court in that capacity.
If a summons issued by the court in the name of the
person as referred to in sub-section (1) is tendered for delivery to that
person when he/she appears in the concerned court, the person shall
receive the summons.
If the person refuses to receive such a summons tendered
for delivery pursuant to sub-section (2), the summons server shall give
a report thereof to the concerned court immediately.
If a report is given pursuant to sub-section (3) and the
contents seem to be reasonable, the court shall make an order to
prevent that person from making representation in the capacity of
attorney, taking due date, doing law practice or making deposition in
the capacity of witness in that court until the person receives the
summons issued by the court in his/her name.
108. To witness service of summons: (1) The concerned ward chairperson
or member or secretary of the ward committee of the local body or
any other government employee and local person in the place where a
summons has to be served shall, while serving the summons pursuant
to this Chapter, assist the summons server in the service of such a
summons, by witnessing the service thereof.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
summons which has been duly served in fulfillment of the other
procedures shall not be invalid by the reason only that the concerned
member, secretary of the concerned local body or other employee has
not witnessed and cooperated in the service of summons or has
refused to cooperate in such service.
109. Person failing to assist being liable to punishment: (1) In serving a
summons sent by the court for service, the concerned member,
secretary of the concerned local body or other government employee
or local person, as well, shall render all such assistance as required to
serve the summons, by searching, showing and identifying the house
of the concerned person, and witness and sign the service as required.
The concerned court may, based on the court of the
summons server, punish one who fails to render assistance pursuant to
sub-section (1) with a fine of up to one hundred rupees.
110. Examination of summons served: Immediately when a report on the
service of summons is submitted by the concerned summons server
after serving it pursuant to Section 105, the concerned office
employee of the court shall examine whether the summons so served
has been duly served or not and certify it if it appears to have met the
requirements and mention the date of its submission to the court and
record it in the case-file.
111. Requirement to make re-service: (1) If, upon making examination
pursuant to Section 109, it appears that the summons served has been
served without in fulfillment of the requirements of law or if, in
examining it upon a complaint made by any person, it appears that the
summons has been served unduly or has not been served at all, the
court shall order the concerned process server or other summons
server to serve it again in fulfillment of the requirements.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such a
process server shall serve the summons again pursuant to Section 106.
112. Process server liable to punishment: If the process server fails to
deliver the third copy of the summons affixed to the house or
homestead of the concerned person when that person is not found to
the concerned local body, such a process server shall be liable to a
fine of up to one thousand rupees for each instance, and the concerned
court may also make an order also to take a departmental action
against such a process server employee.
113. Service of summons may be made by delivering it to attorney or
law practitioner: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section
106, where a person has appointed an attorney to receive a summons
to be served on that person in accordance with law or appointed a law
practitioner for that purpose, such a summons may be served on that
attorney or law practitioner.
The summons served on the attorney or law practitioner
of a party pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be valid as if it were served
on the concerned party himself or herself in consonance with law.
In delivering a plaint accompanied by a summons to a
law practitioner pursuant to Section 99 or serving a summons/timelimit on an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with clauses (c)
or (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 107 and with this Section, a receipt
shall be taken from such an attorney or law practitioner in the form set
forth in Schedule-7.
114. Service of summons in the name of person whose house, address is
not identified: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 106,
in issuing a summons in the name of a person whose house, address is
not identified, the summons may be served by posting it at the place
where the village, city and street of such a person is set down and on
the notice-board of the court, setting out the matter if even such
village, city and street is not identified and publishing it in a
newspaper to be published in the territory over which the court has
jurisdiction.
If a summons/time-limit is published in a newspaper
pursuant to sub-section (1), such a summons/time-limit shall be
deemed to have been served duly.
115. Service of summons on person outside territory: (1) In serving a
summons in the name of a person who is living or residing outside the
territorial jurisdiction of a case in which case has been filed, a
required number of copies of the summons, accompanied by the order
of such a court, shall be sent to the court having territorial jurisdiction
over the territory where that person is living or residing, and the court
in that territory shall also effect the service of summons in fulfillment
of the requirements as set forth in Section 106.
The court so serving the summons shall send the
summons served pursuant to sub-section (1) to the concerned court.
116. One who serves, or causes to be served, unduly or causes
obstruction being liable to punishment: Based on a report of the
concerned summons server or a complaint by a person, the court shall
institute action against the person who does the following act and may
impose the punishment of a fine of up to ten thousand rupees or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or both on such a
person:
Failing to cause the service of a summons issued by the
court without a reasonable reason,
Serving or causing to be served a summons upon setting
down false matters or making false contents,
Making objection or obstruction to the service of a
summons,
Tearing out or peeling off the affixed summons,
Failing to render assistance by the office-bearer with duty
to assist in or witness the service of a summons.
117. Summons unduly served being liable to be void: (1) A party of a
case may, at any time prior to the adjudication of the case, make a
petition to the court claiming that the summons required to have been
served in fulfillment of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter
has not been served in fulfillment of such procedures or has not been
served at all.
If the court holds the contents of the petition as referred
to in sub-section (1) to be reasonable, the court may make an order to
void the summons served unduly and re-serve the summons or order
the concerned party to receive the summons from the court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if, in examining a summons served pursuant to this Chapter, it
appears that the summons has been served without fulfilling the
requirements, the court shall void such a summons and cause the
summons to be served again in fulfillment of the requirements.
118. Appeal equivalent to statement of defense may be made: (1) A
person who is named as a defendant in the plaint may make an appeal
equivalent to the statement of defense to the concerned court hearing
appeal, within thirty five days of the date of knowledge but not later
than six months of the date of ex parte decision by the lower court,
setting out the matter that such a decision has been made by the lower
court against him/her for the reason that he/she was not able to make
defense or to submit a statement of defense in the case as a result of
the service of the summons unduly and without fulfilling the
procedures set forth in this Chapter.
If an appeal equivalent to the statement of defense is
made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court hearing appeal shall, prior
to hearing the memorandum of appeal, shall decide whether or not the
summons was served duly on the person named as the defendant in
the plaint or on the person maintained as the defendant by the court
pursuant to Section 123.
If, on making hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court hearing appeal holds that the summons was not served duly on
the defendant of the case or the maintained as the defendant by the
court pursuant to Section 123, the court hearing appeal shall void the
ex parte decision by the lower court, order the lower court to again
hear and settle the case in accordance with law by maintaining the
memorandum of appeal as the statement of defense, and remand the
case file to that court.
If the case-file, accompanied by its order, is received
from the court hearing appeal pursuant to sub-section (3), the
concerned district court shall issue and serve a summons giving seven
days time-limit, excluding the time required for journey, on the
plaintiff within three days of the receipt of such a case-file.
If the summons referred to in sub-section (4) is served,
the case shall be heard and adjudicated in accordance with law once
the plaintiff appears within the time-limit or the time-limit expires.

Chapter-9
Provisions Relating to Statement of Defense and Counterclaim
119. Statement of defense to be submitted: (1) The defendant shall have
to submit a statement of defense to the concerned court within twenty
one days after the date of delivery of the plaint to the defendant or the
date of service of the summons to submit the statement of defense
pursuant to Chapter 8.
Except as otherwise mentioned elsewhere in this Code, a
statement of defense tendered for submission after the period as
referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be filed, and the court shall not
recognize such a statement of defense despite the fact that it has been
filed.
120. Matters to be set out in statement of defense: In submitting a
statement of defense, the statement of defense shall be submitted in
the form set forth in Schedule-8, setting out, inter alia, the following
matters:
The date of service of summons issued for the
submission of the statement of defense,
The matter to admit or reject the claims of plaint,
If the claim of the plaint is denied, reason and ground
thereof,
The matter of counterclaim, if any, against the plaintiff,
Matters concerning claim, if so designed, against locus
standi, limitation and jurisdiction of the court,
The evidence and pointes of reasons and grounds for
substantiating or refuting the claims and pleas set forth in
the statement of defense,
The matter whether order or decision has to be made by
the court in accordance with the plaintiff's demand.
121. Submission of counterclaim: (1) In submitting the statement of
defense, the defendant may admit or rebut the plaintiff's claims.
If the plaintiff's claims are refuted or denied pursuant to
sub-section (1), the reasons and grounds for such rebuttal or denial
shall be set down.
If the defendant wishes to make any claim against the
plaintiff in the statement of defense as referred to in sub-section (1),
he/she may make such a claim; and if he/she makes such a claim,
the/she shall be deemed to have made a counterclaim.
The counterclaim as referred to in sub-section (3) shall be
set down in the statement of defense and be limited to the matters of
claims by the plaintiff.
If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
defendant shall, in submitting the statement of defense, produce two
copies of the statement of defense if the plaintiff is only one and one
copy thereof for each other plaintiff if there are two or more plaintiffs.
Provided that it shall suffice to produce only one copy for the
plaintiffs living in an undivided family despite the number of such
plaintiffs.
If a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
court fees as referred to in Chapter-6 shall be paid for the same.
Out of the two copies of the statement of defense
submitted pursuant to sub-section (5), the court shall deliver one copy
to the plaintiff making presence on the due date appointed by the court
immediately after the submission of the statement of defense.
Within fifteen days of the submission of the statement of
defense pursuant to sub-section (7), the plaintiff shall submit a
defense in writing stating whether he/she admits or rebuts the
counterclaim to the concerned court.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, where the defendant makes a deposition equivalent to the
statement of defense in writing before the court and makes a
counterclaim, a copy of the written record of such a deposition shall
be provided to the plaintiff pursuant to sub-section (6).
(10) Where a counterclaim is made pursuant to sub-section (9),
the court shall order such a party to pay the court fees as referred to in

Chapter-6 within three days, and in the event of payment of the court
fees in pursuant of such an order, his/her counterclaim shall be
entertained.
122. Filing of statement of defense: (1) The statement of defense tendered
for filing by a person who is named as a defendant in a plaint shall be
examined and be filed if it is found to be within the time-limit and
meet the requirements, and a receipt thereof shall be given to the
concerned party in the form as referred to in Schedule-3 and that party
shall be held on recognizance.
If, in examining the statement of defense pursuant to subsection (1), it appears that it has been tendered after the expiration of
the time-limit or it does not meet the requirements, there shall be
made an endorsement on the statement of defense, for the reasons to
be recorded on the statement of defense.
123. Making defendant by the court: (1) If, notwithstanding any a plaint
has not been filed against any person, it appears that the right, interest,
claim or concern of that person is affected by trying, hearing or
settling of any case or it appears the involvement of other person as
well on the matter of claims by the plaint from the contents of the
plaint or the statement of defense or it is necessary to enquire any
person into any matter for any other reasonable reason, the court may,
for the reasons to be recorded, order to examine such a person.
In examining any person pursuant to sub-section (1), a
summons of seven days shall be served on that person, and if that
person receives the summons and makes presence, the court shall take
his/her deposition setting out evidence.
If a person examined pursuant to sub-section (3) wishes
to make a deposition setting out evidence, his/her deposition shall be
recorded and if that person requests for the submission of written
response, an order shall be made to submit the written response within
a reasonable period.
If it appears from the deposition or written response as
referred to in sub-section (3) that such a person has also a concern or
involvement in the matter of the plaintiff' claims or judgment by the
court would also affect his/her right, interest, claim or concern, the
person shall be held on recognizance as if he/she were a defendant.
If it appears from the written response or deposition
submitted or made pursuant to sub-section (3) that such a person is
merely like evidence, it is not required to hold him/her on
recognizance.
124. Petition for standing as defendant: (1)
If any other person so
wishes, that person may make a petition to the court to stand him/her
as a defendant in a case that is sub judice in the court, showing that
he/she has a right, interest, claim or concern in the case and his/her
right, interest, claim or concern will also be affected from a judgment
on that case, within sixty days after the date of submission of the
statement of defense by the persons named as defendants in that case
or after the expiration of the time-limit for the submission of the
statement of defense.
If a petition as referred to in sub-section (1) is received
and the contents of petition seem to be reasonable, the court shall by
its order maintain that person as a defendant and give information
thereof to the plaintiff and the defendant of the case.
Provided that the defendant so maintained shall not be entitled
to make a counterclaim against the plaintiff.
125. Fees for statement of defense: In submitting a statement of defense,
there shall be charged the fees of two hundred and fifty rupees.

Chapter-10
Provisions Relating to Endorsement
126. Document to be examined: The concerned officer shall, immediately
when a plaint or statement of defense tendered for filing in the court,
or a petition or memorandum of appeal to be filed in the course of
proceedings of a case is tendered for filing, study such a document
and examine whether it is in the form set forth in law, is within the
limitation, falls under the jurisdiction of the court, sets out such
matters as required to be set out, it contains any error, incompletion in
writing, presentation or mentioning or any difference between letters
and figures and whether it does not meet the requirements under the
law for any reason.
127. To provide opportunity to correct document failing to meet
requirements: (1) If, in making examination pursuant to Section 126,
such a document seems to consist of errors such as failing to be in the
form set forth in law, failing to set out the matters required to be set
out or containing any error, incompletion in writing, presentation or
mentioning or any difference between letters and figures and such a
document can be registered if such errors are corrected and then the
document tendered for filing, the concerned officer of the court shall
make endorsement on the document setting out the matters to be
corrected or made in conformity with the requirements and date the
endorsement, and affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.
If an endorsement is made pursuant to sub-section (1), ,
the court shall order the filing of such a document if it is tendered for
filing upon making it meet the requirements within the remaining
limitation or time-limit, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for
more than three days, or within three days after the date of
endorsement, if the limitation or time-limit is remaining for less than
three days.
If an order as referred to in sub-section (2) is made, such
a document shall be filed.
128. Endorsement to be made: If, in making examination pursuant to

Section 126, it seems that such a document cannot be filed because of
reasons such as being not within the limitation or time-limit, not
falling within the jurisdiction of the concerned court, not being
required or allowed to be tried by the court or being contrary to law,
the concerned officer of the court shall, setting down the grounds and
reasons for making such an endorsement in that document, endorse
and date it, affix the seal of court thereunto and return it to the
concerned person, by taking a receipt thereof.
129. Records to be maintained in court: One copy of the document
returned pursuant to Section 127 or endorsed pursuant to Section 128
shall be recorded in the court.
130. Petition against order of endorsement: (1) A party who is not
satisfied with the matter of endorsement made by the concerned
officer of any court pursuant to Section 128 may make a petition to
the judge of such a court and to the court hearing appeal if such an
endorsement is made by the judge himself or herself, praying for an
order to file the document submitted by that party.
If a petition is made to the judge pursuant to sub-section
(1), the judge shall make an order whether the matter of endorsement
is in conformity with law or not within fifteen days after the date of
making petition.
Prior to making an order pursuant to sub-section (2), the
judge may, without examination or not, conduct hearings on the
matter of whether the endorsement is in conformity with law or not,
and if, upon conducting hearings, the endorsement does not appear to
be in conformity with law, the judge shall make an order to file the
document.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the
endorsement making officer shall, upon receipt of such an order, file
such a document.
If, upon conducting hearings pursuant to sub-section (3),
the endorsement appears to be in conformity with law, the judge may,
for reasons to be recorded, dismiss the petition.

Chapter-12
Provisions Relating to Due Date for Appearance
135. Party or opponent required to appear on due date: (1) Except in
cases where appearance on the appointed due date is not required or
where a party is not required by a court order to appear on the
appointed due date, a case shall be heard, tried and settled by
requiring each party of the case to appear on the appointed due date.
After the examination by the court of evidence of both
plaintiff and defendant, any party if he/she so wishes may not appear
on the appointed due date with the leave of the court.
136. Appointment of the same due date for appearance: (1) The
court
shall appoint the same due date for both plaintiff and defendant
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 135 if they are on recognizance.
In appointing the due date pursuant to sub-section (1)
after the filing of the plaint, the date shall be so appointed for the
plaintiff by calculating the period in which a statement of defense is
submitted or likely to be submitted, by estimating the time-limit for
the submission of the statement of defense.
If the due date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) does
not correspond to the period in which the defendant has submitted the
statement of defense, the due dates subsequent to the submission of
the statement of defense shall be so appointed that such dates are the
same for both plaintiff and defendant.
137. Appointment of due date by assigning purpose: (1) In appointing
the due date pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall appoint the due
date for appearance by setting down in the book of due date and the
sheet of due date the reason and purpose for which the date has been
appointed and the proceeding to be carried out on each date.
The proceeding specified shall be carried on the due date
appointed pursuant to sub-section (1).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
the specified proceeding cannot be conducted for any reasonable
ground on the appointed due date or the time does not allow to
complete the proceeding on such date, the court shall set down the
same matter in the receipt of due date for appearance, and appoint
another due date for appearance.
The book of due date and the sheet of due date for
appearance shall be maintained in the forms set forth in Schedule-7
and Schedule-8, respectively.
138. Not to overlap due date for appearance: (1) If a case has been filed
by or against a party of a case, other than a case in which an attorney
has been appointed in accordance with law, in another court that is
outside fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) of the case in which the
case has been filed and the party gives information thereof to the court
in which the case has been filed by making a petition thereto, such
court shall, while appointing the due date for appearance, so appoint
such due date as not to overlap with the due date appointed by that
other court in the case being tried by it.
If a party who is on recognizance in more than one case
in which the same party is plaintiff or defendant in the same court
makes a petition, setting out the matter, to the court for the
appointment of the same due date, the court shall, as far as practicable,
appoint the same due date for all cases.
If the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section (1)
and the party of the case appears before any one section on the
appointed due date, the party shall be deemed to have appeared on the
due date for the other cases in the same section.
If any party to a case appears on the due date appointed
pursuant to this Section, he/she shall be caused to sign the receipt of
the due date and his/her appearance shall then be recorded.
If a party does no appear pursuant to sub-section (4), the
concerned party shall be deemed to have expired the due date, and the
concerned authority shall certify that matter.
The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
shall be attached with the concerned case-file.
The receipt of due date as referred to in sub-section (4)
shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-11.
139. Due date for appearance deemed to have been appointed on the
following day: If the court remains closed owing to public holiday
falling on the due date appointed by the court, the due date for
appearance shall be deemed to have been appointed on the following
day of the end of the public holiday.
140. Requirement to give information in event of person required to
appear on due date appointed for appearance being held in
detention: (1) Where a person required to appear before any court on
the due date appointed for appearance in the course of any case has
been held in detention for any reason, the concerned party shall give
information of that matter indicating in which case he/she has been
held in detention to the court in which he/she has to appear in relation
to the case.
If information of being held in detention is received
pursuant to sub-section (1), the concerned court shall seek from the
concerned body information as to why he/she has been held in
detention and how long he/she has to be held in detention.
If information is sought pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned body shall give the court information about the reason for
holding the person in detention and possible days for which he/she has
to be held in detention, and information to the effect that he/she
cannot be released from detention if so.
If, upon the information received pursuant to sub-section
(3), the person held in detention is to be released within one month,
and that person appears before the court within seven days from the
date of release from detention, excluding the time required for journey,
the case shall be tried by appointing the due date for appearance in
accordance with law, as if that day were the date of appearance.
If, upon the information received from the concerned
body pursuant to sub-section (3), the person required to appear on the
due date appointed for appearance remains in detention for a term
exceeding one month or the day of his/her release from detention is
not certain or there exists a circumstance that he/she cannot be
released from detention, it is not necessary to stay the proceeding,
hearing, trial and settlement of the case.
If a person held in detention appoints and send an
attorney to act on his/her behalf during such period, the attorney so
appointed may do and take action on his/her behalf.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), if
a case cannot be settled without subpoenaing and examining any party
of the case, the case may be heard, tried and settled by subpoenaing
and examining that party in accordance with law.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a party of a case who being on recognizance has been held
in detention in the course of the proceeding of the case is released
from detention and appears within seven days, excluding the time
required for journey, after the date of release, the case shall be tried by
holding him/her on recognizance.
141. Not to expire appointed due date: (1) Except as otherwise provided
for in law, where any party to a case is on recognizance in accordance
with this Chapter, such a party or his/her attorney shall not fail to
appear on the due date appointed by the court for appearance and
thereby to expire the appointed due date, by failing to.
If any party to a case fails to appear on the due date for
appearance appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) and expires the same,
the following provisions shall apply to the following matters, after the
expiration of the period of the due date for appearance allowed to be
extended pursuant to this Chapter:
If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
the filing of the plaint but prior to the submission of the
statement of defense, the plaint claim shall be dismissed.
If the plaintiff expires the due date for appearance after
the submission of the statement of defense and it appears
or is held that the defendant has admitted the plaintiff's
claims in whole or in part, the court shall pass a
judgment accordingly to such an extent of admission and
dismiss the remaining claims.
If the defendant does not submit the statement of defense
or expires the due date for appearance after the
submission of the statement of defense, the court shall
examine all proofs and evidence produced by the plaintiff,
appreciate the proofs and evidence of the plaintiff and the
defendant and adjudge the case accordingly.
If, subsequent to the filing of the plaint or submission of
the statement of defense, both plaintiff and defendant
expire the due date for appearance, the case shall be
dismissed.
If a case is dismissed pursuant to clauses (a), (b), (c) or
(d) of sub-section (2), no other plaint claim by the same plaintiff
against the same defendant on the same matter shall lie.
142. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section 141, if a party
fails to appear before the court on the time-limit or due date for
appearance appointed in any case and expires such a time-limit or due
date owing to a force majeure event, such a party shall be entitled to
the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance for a period
not exceeding twenty one days for two times in maximum.
142. Provisions relating to fixation of instance: (1) In fixing the instance
where the due date for appearance once appointed and received
subsequent to the filing of a case is expired by a party to the case, the
instance shall be fixed by computing only the expired due date for
appearance but not computing the extended time-limit.
In computing days for the extension of the due date for
appearance expired by the party of a case, provision shall be made to
have extension by reckoning the days up to the day allowed to be
extended with effect from the following day of the day of expiration
of the time-limit or due date for appearance, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a case is remanded by a higher court to a lower court to readjudge it or a case suspended is revived, the instance of the timelimit or due date for appearance extended previously shall not be
counted.
144. Extension of expired time-limit or due date for appearance:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if any
party to a case makes a petition to the court where the case has been
filed for the extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance
which has been expired owing to the existence of the following
circumstance, and the court holds the petition to be reasonable, the
court shall order the extension of the expired time-limit or due date, as
the case may be:
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the timelimit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
person himself or herself had to observe obsequies and
appears before the court within seven days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of completion of
obsequies, and makes a petition for the extension of the
time-limit or due date for appearance, the court shall
extend the expired time-limit or due date for appearance
for that period.
If a woman required to appear before the court at the due
date for appearance expires the time-limit or due date for
appearance for the reason that she has delivered a child
and appears before the court within thirty days, excluding
the time required for journey, after the day of delivery,
and makes a petition for the extension of the time-limit or
due date, the court shall extend the expired time-limit or
due date for appearance for that period.
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the time585
limit or due date for appearance for the reason that
movement has been difficult because the route has
remained closed or motor vehicles have not plied because
of a natural calamities such as earthquake, flood,
landslide and snow-fall or for other natural calamity and
appears before the court within ten days, excluding the
time required for journey, after the date of resumption of
such a route, and makes a petition, accompanied by an
evidence issued by the concerned local body or other
competent body, indicating the date of closure of the
route and the date of resumption of the route, as for the
extension of the time-limit or due date for appearance,
the court shall extend the expired time-limit or due date
for appearance for that period.
If a person required to appear before the court at the
time-limit or due date for appearance expires the timelimit or due date for appearance for the reason that the
person has been abducted or taken hostage by another
person and appears before the court within seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, after the date of
release from abduction or hostage, and makes a petition
for the extension of the time-limit or due date for
appearance, the court shall extend the expired time-limit
or due date for appearance for that period.
145. Computation of time required for journey: (1) In computing the
time required for journey, it shall be computed according to the actual
days required to make journey by bus or rail in the case of a place
where regular transport service is in operation and at the rate of one
day for every fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in the case of a
place where such bus or rail service is not in operation.
In computing the time required for journey pursuant to
sub-section (1), the time-limit of one day shall be given for a distance
of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh).
Provided that no time required for journey shall be given for a
distance of less than fifteen kilometers (around four Kosh) in total.
146. Not to settle case until the period allowed to be extended: Even
though a party to a case fails to appears at the time-limit or due date
for appearance appointed by the court and expires such time-limit or
due date, the court shall not try and settle the case pending the
completion of the period allowed to be extended pursuant to Section
142 or 144.
147. Government of Nepal not required to remain on recognizance: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, the
Government of Nepal shall not be required to remain on recognizance
in a case in which the Government of Nepal, constitutional body or
court is a plaintiff or defendant in accordance with law.
Provided that the government attorney shall appear on the day
of examination of evidence, hearing of the case or on the day ordered
by the court for the attorney to make appearance to represent such an
agency.
148. Power to try and settle cases at appeal level without holding
parties on recognizance: Except as otherwise ordered by the court,
cases at the appeal level may be tried and settled without holding
parties on recognizance.

Chapter-13
Provisions Relating to Attorney
149. Appointment of attorney: (1) Any party of a case may appoint a
representative to carry out any acts that pertain to the case in the court
on his/her behalf.
Where a representative is appointed pursuant to subsection (1), an attorney shall be deemed to have been appointed.
In appointing an attorney pursuant to sub-section (2),
there shall be executed a deed pursuant to Section 151.
A party to a case may revoke at any time the attorney
appointed under this Section by filing a petition before the court or
may appoint another attorney by executing another deed.
150. Qualification of person to be appointed as attorney: A person who
possesses the following qualification may be eligible to appointed as
an attorney:
A person who is competent to enter into a contract in
accordance with law,
A person who is not in default of payment of a
government amount in question according to judgment
and any such fees, court fees as required to be paid to the
court for the execution of judgment or any fine or
punishment imposed by the court,
Any person who has not been sentenced to any offence of
forgery, fraud, corruption or offence involving moral
turpitude.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall
prevent any party to a case from appointing any person
living in an undivided family as his/her attorney.
151. Matters to be set out in power of attorney: (1) A power of attorney
set down for appointing an attorney pursuant to this Chapter shall set
out the following matters:
Short description of the reason for the appoint of attorney,
The full names, addresses, and ages of the persons who
appoint an attorney and who are to be appointed as an
attorney, and their citizenship number or other
description identifying them,
The acts authorized to be done by the attorney,
The matter that one who appoints and one who is to be
appointed under the power of attorney are not in default
of payment of a government amount in question
according to judgment and any such fees, court fees as
required to be paid to the court for the execution of
judgment or any fine or punishment imposed by the court,
The venue and date of the execution of the power of
attorney.
The power of attorney shall be executed in the form set
forth in Schedule-9.
The power of attorney as referred to in sub-section (2)
shall be signed by the party appointing the attorney and also mention
the identification of at least two witnesses and the conveyancer of the
power of attorney.
152. Person may become attorney in more than one case: A person may
be appointed as an attorney simultaneously in more than once case or
by more than one person in the same case.
Provided that a person who is an attorney of a party to a case
shall not also become an attorney of the opposite party to the same
case simultaneously.
153. Party may be attorney: In cases where the same party of a case
involves two or more than two persons as plaintiffs or defendants,
any one of them may be appointed as an attorney in the same case on
behalf of others.
154. Attorney may be appointed in more than one court: A person who
has been appointed as an attorney in a case sub judice in a court may
be appointed as an attorney in another case sub judice in another court.
155. Powers of attorney: The powers of an attorney shall be as set forth
in the power of attorney executed at the time of appointment of the
attorney.
156. Power of attorney to meet requirements: (1) Prior to registering a
power of attorney, the court shall examine whether such power of
attorney meets the requirements in accordance with this Chapter and
register it if it appears to meet such requirements.
If, in making examination pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that the power of attorney does not meet the requirements for
registration, it shall be endorsed setting out the reason for its failure to
meet such requirements and file it within a period of three days along
with such requirements.
If the power of attorney endorsed pursuant to sub-section
(2) is executed in meeting of the requirements and produced within
the time-limit, the court shall register such power of attorney.
157. Power to change attorney or carry out proceeding in person: (1) If
a party to a case who has once appointed an attorney so wishes, the
party may at any time revoke the power of attorney executed by
him/her and carry out acts pertaining to the case in person or appoint
another person as his/her attorney.
In the event of the appointment of an attorney or carrying
out of acts pertaining to the case by the party in person pursuant to
sub-section (2), the power of attorney appointing the attorney shall be
attached with the case-file, or record thereof shall be maintained if the
party carries out such acts in person.
158. Provisions relating to authorized attorney: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, a person may appoint
another person as an authorized attorney by executing a power of
attorney, to file a plaint, submit a statement of defense, withdraws
plaint claim or enter into compromise or carry out any other legal
action on his/her behalf, with or without specifying any case.
If any summons or summons required to be given to or
served on the concerned party of a case in which an authorized
attorney has been appointed is given to or served on the authorized
attorney, the summons or summons shall be deemed to have been duly
given or served.
A person who has been appointed as an authorized
attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) may, in the case of proceedings of
the case, appear in person before the court or appoint another person
as an attorney.
In appointing an authorized attorney by executing a
general power of attorney without specifying any case pursuant to this
Section, it has to be signed and executed by the person appointing an
attorney in presence of, and certified by, any district judge if the
power of attorney is executed within the territory of Nepal, and any
Nepalese ambassador or consul general if it is executed in a foreign
country.
In making certification of a power of attorney pursuant to
sub-section (4), the photograph of the person who appoints and that of
the person who is appointed under the power of attorney shall be
affixed unto any part of the power of attorney, and duplicate copies of
their citizenship certificates or passports shall also be attached
therewith.
The fee of two hundred rupees shall be charged for the
certification of a power of attorney pursuant to sub-section (4).
159. Transfer of right in immovable property through authorized
attorney: (1) A person who, for any reason, is not able to appear in
person before the concerned office in order to sell or dispose of, or
exchange, or otherwise transfer any immovable property in which
he/she has right and ownership or execute a will to be effectively
immediately in relation to such property or to execute such a deed as
required to be registered pursuant to law may sell, dispose of,
exchange or transfer such property by appointing the authorized
attorney by executing the power of attorney setting out the reasonable
ground for his/her inability to appear in person.
In appointing an authorized attorney pursuant to subsection (1), the procedures referred to in sub-sections (4) and (5) of

Section 158 shall be fulfilled.
A person who has been appointed as an authorized
attorney pursuant to sub-section (1) shall carry out such acts as
required be performed on behalf of the person executing the power of
attorney, subject to the terms and conditions of the power of attorney
executed and delivered to him/her.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, a deed of testament or testamentary will cannot be executed
by appointing an authorized attorney.
160. Termination of status of authorized attorney: The status of
authorized attorney pursuant to a power of authority executed
pursuant to this Chapter shall ipso facto be terminated in any of the
following circumstances:
If the power of authorized attorney specifies any certain
act, purpose and period and such act, purpose or period is
completed or expired,
If the power of authorized attorney is so executed that it
shall cease to remain valid after the occurrence of any
specific event or circumstance or completion of such
event or circumstance, and such event or circumstance
occurs or completes,
If the person executing the power of attorney revokes the
power of attorney by publishing a notice in any two
newspapers of national circulation,
If the person executing the power of attorney or the
person appointed under such power dies prior to the
completion of the act set forth in the power of attorney,
If the concerned person of the property intended to be
transferred through attorney appears in person and
transfer the right in such property,
If a case is filed in the court a case between the person
executing, and the person appointed under, the power of
attorney, and the person appointed by the power of
attorney or any of his/her undivided family members in
relation to the property as referred to in the power of
attorney,
If the person appointed under the power of attorney gives
information in writing to the person executing the power
of attorney, thereby expressing his/her unwillingness to
act as the authorized attorney.

Chapter-14
Provisions Relating to Interlocutory or Interim Orders
161. Petition to be made for issuance of interlocutory order: (1) Where
the claim of a plaint or memorandum of appeal shall be meaningless if
any act or action is not prevented immediately or if any act is not done
immediately in the course of proceedings of any case, or if any matter
is not maintained as it is in regard to any claim or demand of a case,
the plaintiff or appellant may make a petition, setting out that matter,
to the concerned court, praying for the issuance of an interlocutory
order on any matter.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"interlocutory order" means any order other than a decision or
judgment made in relation to a case.
If, upon hearing the petition received pursuant to subsection (1), it appears to be appropriate to issue such an order, the
court may, for the reasons to be recorded, issue an interlocutory order
on any matter.
162. Petition against interlocutory order: (1) A person who is not
satisfied with the following order issued by a lower court in the course
of proceedings of a case may make a petition to the court hearing
appeal from such court to uphold or withhold such an order within
fifteen days after the date of such order:
Order to hold parties on recognizance, take guarantee and
court fees,
Revocation of a complaint made to the judge against the
order of endorsement that the case cannot be registered
pursuant to Chapter-10,
Order issued upon determining the matters relating to
locus standi, limitation or jurisdiction in the course of
holding preliminary hearings pursuant to Chapter-11,
Any other order made in the course of proceedings of the
case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
any party to a case may make to the court hearing appeals, a petition
alleging that the time-limit has expired of any action taken by the
court or irregularity has been made by not performing the act required
to be done in accordance with law within the specified period, and
praying for the revocation such undue order.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
the court hearing appeal shall, as required, procure the report and
case-file from the concerned court and hold hearings.
If, in holding hearing pursuant to sub-section (3), if the
order made by the lower court seems to be undue or made upon
expiration of the time-limit, the court hearing appeal may, for reasons
to be recorded, uphold or withhold such an order or order to act in
accordance with law.
163. Provisions relating to the issuance of interim order: (1) A party
may, in the course of proceedings or in relation to an injunction
petition, pray for the issuance of an interim order, setting out that the
claims of the petition would be meaningless if any matter is not kept
in status quo in respect of any matter or claim of the case on any
matter pending the final settlement of such a case.
If an interim order is prayed for pursuant to sub-section
(1) and the court thinks it appropriate and necessary, the court may
issue the following order for a period until the petition is finally
settled:
To issue an interim order with specification of the period,
To make an order to summon the presence of the other
party to hold discussions on whether the interim order
issued pursuant to clause (a) should be given continuity
or not,
If it appears, from the discussions held in relation to the
interim order, that there exists a situation where the other
party has suffered loss, following the final decision of the
petition, as a result of the issuance of the interim order in
his/her favor and a commitment is writing is made to
bear compensation pursuant to the laws in force, to issue
a conditional interim order,
If the claim of a petition appears to be meaningless if the
matter of claim of the petition is not kept in status quo, to
keep that matter in status quo.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
a petition is made for an interim order but the court is of the opinion
that it is appropriate to made decision on a given matter, nothing shall
preclude the court from making the final decision on that matter.
The interim order issued pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
be deemed to have ipso facto been ineffective upon the final
settlement of the petition.
If an order is made to summon the presence of the other
party to hold discussions on whether the interim order issued pursuant
to sub-section (2) should be given continuity or not and discussion
cannot be hold on that day because of the petitioner, the interim order
shall then be inoperative.
The court shall assign the reason for issuing, or refusing
to issue, an interim order pursuant to this Section.
164. Revocation of interim order: (1) Any party may make a petition to
the same court for the revocation of an interim order issued pursuant
to Section 163 showing the reason that the interim order has been
issued upon ex parte hearing or that an opportunity has not been given
to that party to present his/her matters.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may summon the presence of the other party and hold hearings on that
matter.
If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), the
court thinks it appropriate to revoke the interim order issued pursuant
to Section 163, the court may make an order to revoke such order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), if
it appears appropriate to amend or alter the terms of the interim order
instead of revoking the same, the court may, for the reasons to be
recorded, amend or alter the terms of the interim order issued pursuant
to sub-section (2) of Section 163.
165. Compensation to be paid: (1) Where the interim order issued
pursuant to Section 163 has been revoked or its terms altered or
amended and any party has suffered any loss or damage being unable
to do any act or take any action as a result of the interim order prior to
such revocation, amendment or alteration, that party may make a
petition to the concerned court against the party praying for the
interim order for compensation, setting out the amount of such loss or
damage.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may summon the presence of the concerned parties in the court and
hold hearings on the matter.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the petitioner has actually suffered loss or damage as a
result of the issuance of interim order, the court may order for the
payment of compensation in consideration for such loss or damage.
Provided that no order may be made to make payment of
compensation in consideration of any remote or indirect loss or
damage.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (3), the party
praying for the interim order shall pay the compensation pursuant to
that order.

Chapter-15
Provisions Relating to Examination of Documentary Evidence
166. Production of documentary evidence: (1) The plaintiff or the
defendant, as the case may be, shall produce the originals and
duplicate copies of such documentary evidence related with the claims
as set down by the plaintiff in the plaint and with the pleas as set
down by the defendant in the statement of defense along with the
plaint or the statement of defense, as the case may be.
The court shall verify the original evidence submitted
pursuant to sub-section (1) with its copy and return the original
evidence to the concerned party.
The original returned pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
produced as and when the court so demands.
Any evidence not produced pursuant to sub-sections (1)
and (3) may not be taken in evidence in the concerned case.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), if
in a case of which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or defendant,
the documentary evidence cannot for any reason be produced at the
time of filing or submission of the plaint or the statement of defense,
the plaintiff or the defendant may set down the reason and description
thereof in the plaint or the statement of defense that in which office
such evidence is or likely to be held.
Where description is set down pursuant to sub-section (5),
the court may, as required, itself procure and examine such evidence.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if it is not possible to produce the original of any
documentary evidence before the court immediately, a duplicate copy
thereof shall be duly produced with the plaint or the statement of
defense, accompanied by the reason for the same.
167. Evidence to be mentioned: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in this Section 167, if the original or duplicate copy of any
documentary evidence is not available for the time being but such
evidence is in the custody of any person or organization, the plaintiff
or the defendant shall mention that matter in the plaint or the
statement of defense, as the case may be.
If the evidence is mentioned pursuant to sub-section (1)
and it is necessary to examine such evidence, the court may order the
concerned person or organization to produce the original of such
evidence before the court within such a period as specified by the
court.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), such
person or organization shall produce such evidence within the period
as specified by the court.
The court may fine the person or chief of organization
who does not produce the evidence pursuant to sub-section (3) with a
sum not exceeding five hundred rupees.
168. Request for time: (1) If, for any reason, it is not possible to produce
any documentary evidence at the time of filing of the plaint or
submission of the statement of defense and the plaintiff or the
defendant makes a request, accompanied by the reason for the same,
for time to produce such evidence, the court may, if it finds the reason
to be reasonable, give the time not exceeding fifteen days.
The plaintiff or the defendant shall produce such
evidence before the court within the time given pursuant to subsection (1).
Any evidence not produced within the time as referred to
in sub-section (2) may not be examined as evidence.
169. Request for leave to produce evidence: If any new and important
documentary evidence that was not in the knowledge of the plaintiff
or the defendant at the time of filing of the plaint or submission of the
statement of defense, as the case may be, comes to the knowledge or
is found/discovered and the plaintiff or the defendant requests for a
leave to produce such an evidence and the matter seems to be
reasonable, the court may grant a leave to produce such evidence and
examine it.
170. Return of originals: (1) After the production of the original and
duplicate copy of any documentary evidence pursuant to this Chapter,
the person producing such evidence shall be caused to sign the
duplicate copy of such documentary evidence.
The concerned officer of the court shall verify the
duplicate copy of the documentary evidence produced pursuant to
sub-section (1) with its original and certify the duplicate copy and
record it in the concerned case-file.
After recording the certified duplicate copy as referred to
in sub-section (2) with the case-file, the original of the documentary
evidence produced pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be returned to the
concerned person.
171. Not to examine evidence prior to submission of statement of
defense: No proceeding may be initiated to examine evidence
normally prior to the submission of the statement of defense or
expiration of the period for the submission of the statement of defense
upon the filing of a plaint, except in accordance with law.
172. To examine evidence: If it appears necessary to examine any such
document in evidence as maintained with a government office as
mentioned in the plaint or the statement of defense, an order shall be
made to examine it normally within a period of seven days after the
date of the submission of the statement of defense or after the date
upon the expiration of the period for the submission of the statement
of defense where such statement has not been submitted.
173. To examine evidence on issue to be decided: (1) On the due date
appointed for appearance of the parties of a case following the filing
of the plaint, the court shall inspect the plaint and the statement of
defense and all documents produced, in presence of the plaintiff and
the defendant and inquire the plaintiff and the defendant into
necessary matters and ascertain the issues admitted or denied by both
parties.
If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that both parties agree on the issues claimed by the plaintiff,
the court shall make decision on the same day.
If, in making ascertainment pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that both parties disagree on the matters partly or fully, the
court shall frame the issues that are denied and to be decided and
clearly set out other additional evidence required to be examined in
that connection, order the production of evidence and proofs and
appoint the date for the examination of evidence and proofs.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, no evidence may be examined on any matter other than the
matters relevant with the issues to be decided.
174. Power of court to produce deed: (1) The court may, at any time in
the course of proceedings of a case, order any person who is in
possession such a document which the party of the case has not been
able to produce or cannot produce as may be necessary to decide the
issues of the case, to produce the deed within the period as specified
by the court.
The court may order any person in possession of any
document that can be taken in evidence and is relevant with the issues
to be decided in a case to produce such a document before the court.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), the
concerned person shall produce the deed in person or through any
other person before the court within the period as specified in the
order.
The court may fine the person who does not produce the
document pursuant to sub-section (3) or does not appear before the
court without showing a reasonable reason for the failure to produce it
or does not make a petition with a sum not exceeding five thousand
rupees.
175. Order of examination of evidence: (1) Except as otherwise ordered
by the court, in examining evidence on the date appointed pursuant to
the court order for the examination of evidence by the court, the
evidence produced by the defendant shall ordinarily be examined after
the examination of the evidence produced by the plaintiff.
If, in examining evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), any
party immediately raise any objection that any document or proof is
inadmissible in evidence or is irrelevant, the judge shall immediately
order as to whether such an objection is reasonable or not.
If, in making order pursuant to sub-section (2), any
document produced by any party is held to be inadmissible in
evidence or irrelevant, that matter shall be recorded in the case-file.
176. Power to cause document to be executed: (1) The court may, in
relation to any necessary matter related with the case as required to be
inquired with the parties of case, inquire it at any time in presence of
the plaintiff or the defendant and cause a document to be executed to
that effect.
Except on such matters as required to be tried, heard and
settled upon a plaint in accordance with law, the court shall try, hear
and settle any case to be tired, heard and settled upon any other
complaint by setting out the evidence of each matter required to be set
out by the plaintiff or the defendant, getting them to make depositions
and recording the same.
177. To make deposition whether document is genuine or forged: (1)
On the date appointed for the examination of proof and evidence, the
evidentiary document submitted by the plaintiff shall be shown in
original to the defendant and that of evidentiary document submitted
by the defendant shall be shown in original to the plaintiff, and the
contents to be read out to each, and if any party names a document as
a genuine, forged or fraudulent one, deposition to that effect shall be
taken and recorded.
If, in showing or reading out a document pursuant to subsection (1), a party is not able to immediately determine whether the
document in question is genuine, forged or fraudulent one and
requests for a time-limit, the court may give a time-limit not
exceeding three days.
Where a document bearing the signature of any person
other than the parties to the case has been produced and a request is
made by a party of the case for a time-limit in view of being unable to
immediately determine whether the document is genuine, forged or
fraudulent, a time-limit not exceeding fifteen days may be given to
make statement, accompanied by evidence, as to the genuineness,
forgery or fraudulence of the document.
The person who is to make deposition within the timelimit given pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be caused to make
deposition as to the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of the
document, and any deposition made by him/her shall be recorded.
Where a deposition to be taken pursuant to sub-section
(4) is made that the document is forged or fraudulent, depositions of
all parties to the case, if present on that day, shall be taken on that day
and that by any party who is not present on that day shall be recorded
on the day on which he/she is present.
Where the attorney or legal practitioner of any party is
making presence and it appears necessary to summon the presence of
the concerned party in person, the court may summon the presence of,
and take the deposition of, such a party in person.
If, in showing or reading out an evidentiary document
pursuant to this Section, the genuineness, forgery or fraudulence of
the document cannot be ascertained, the court may send such an
evidentiary document to the concerned specialist for its examination.
178. Reading out for genuineness, forgery or fraudulence not required:
Any document that cannot be taken in evidence in accordance
with law is not required to be read out or shown for the purpose of
genuineness, forgery or fraudulence.
If a document produced by a defendant affects another
defendant, it shall be shown and read out to such affected defendant
and his/her deposition shall be taken, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Section 177.
179. Examination of evidence by court hearing appeal: If it is
necessary to adjudge a case of which the judgment examining court is
seized by way of appeal or otherwise by ascertaining whether any
document produced for evidence in that case is a genuine or forged
one and the lower court has adjudged the case without carrying out
that proceeding, the court hearing appeal shall procure the original of
that deed or document and take the deposition of the party.
180. To try, hear and adjudicate case by taking deposition in the same
case: A case that is a criminal case in accordance with law and has
arisen from the statement of defense or deposition of the defendant of
any civil case pending in any court shall be tried by taking deposition
for the same case-file.
Provided that the court trying only specific type of cases under
any specific Act shall try, hear and settle only such cases in
accordance with such Act.
181. To examine affected parties: If it appears from the study of the
documents attached with the case-file related with any case that any
matter to be adjudged in such a case will also affect any third person
or that such person is also found to be relevant with the case, the court
shall examine even such a person, provide him/her with a reasonable
time and opportunity to be heard and try, hear and settle the case by
holding him/her on recognizance based on the evidence produced by
him/her and by requiring him/her to appear on the appointed due date
as if he/she were the principal person.
182. Power to make measurement or map: (1) If it appears that the issue
should not be adjudged without making a map, survey or
measurement of any immovable property subject to dispute in a case,
the court may order for making the map or measurement of such
property.
In making a map or measurement pursuant to an order
made under sub-section (1), a date shall be appointed for both parties
to make presence at the place where the map or measurement has to
be made or a notice of such date shall be given to them.
Where a date has been appointed pursuant to sub-section
(2), one employee of at least non-gazetted second class serving in the
court, also accompanied by a surveyor, shall go to that place and carry
out such inspection, measurement and survey of the house, wall or
other immovable property as may be required to be so surveyed or
measured on that date, in presence also of both parties of the case, at
least one representative of the local body as far as available and at
least two local persons.
In making a map or measurement pursuant to sub-section
(3), such a map deed has to be got signed by the concerned party,
local person and representative of the local body and by the concerned
employee, produced before the court and recorded in the concerned
case-file.
If the parties do not show up in the place where such map
or measurement has to be carried out pursuant to sub-section (3) or
refuse to sign despite showing up there or if this is a case in which the
parties have not made presence on the date appointed for appearance,
such a map or measurement as may be required shall be carried out in
presence of the other persons mentioned in sub-section (4), and a
remark that the parties have been absent shall be mentioned therein,
and shall be signed by the employee deputed and by at least one
representative of the local body, produced before the court and
recorded in the concerned case-file.
If a representative of the local body who is required to be
present pursuant to this Section is not present despite a notice having
been given to him/her, any inspection, map or measurement meeting
the other requirements shall not be invalid only by the reason that
he/she has remained absent.
A map or measurement that fails to meet the
requirements pursuant to this Section shall be inadmissible in
evidence.
183. Power to inspect venue: (1) If it appears that it is not possible to
produce the subject-matter of a case actually before the court owing to
the complexity of the subject-matter of the case or it is necessary to
make direct observation or inspection of the place where the matter of
dispute or immovable property is situated, the judge shall make an
order, setting out the reason for the same.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall appoint the day in advance for such inspection, and the judgment
himself or herself or the technician or other employee deputed
pursuant to the order of court shall make such observation or
inspection.
If observation or inspection is made by a technician or
other person deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), such technician or
person shall prepare a report only on the matters relevant to the
subject-matter of the case and submit it to the court.

Chapter-16
Provisions Relating to Examination of Witness
184. Parties to cause presence of witness: (1)
The party of a case shall
cause the presence of any witness mentioned as his/her evidence on
the date appointed by the court for the examination of witness.
The evidence of a witness who fails to make presence on
the date appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) shall not be taken in.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
(2), if the witness fails to make presence on the due date appointed for
causing the presence of witness owing to a circumstance as referred to
in clause (c) of Section 144 and the party makes a petition for the
appointment of another due date, and the petition is accompanied by a
recommendation by the concerned local body or any government
body certifying the occurrence of such a circumstance, the court shall
appoint another due date to examine such a witness no later than ten
days of the date of such petition.
185. Power to court to subpoena and examine witness: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 184, the court shall
issue a summons to any witness who must be examined in a case
involving the property of the Government of Nepal or public property
or public right, interest or concern, thereby ordering such a witness to
make presence before the court within fifteen days.
Where a summons is issued pursuant to sub-section (1),
such a witness shall make presence within the period specified by the
court.
A summons to be issued in the name of a witness
pursuant to this Section shall be in the format set forth in Schedule-13.
186. Power to examine witness through video conference: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if it is
not possible to produce before the court a witness required to be
examined pursuant to this Chapter because of the witness being highly
aged or physically infirm or staying outside Nepal, and any party of
the case makes a petition to the court for the examination of such a
witness through video conference and the court thinks the matter to be
reasonable, the court may make an order for the examination of the
witness through video conference.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned party shall cause the presence of the witness at the pace and
day appointed for the examination of witness through video
conference.
In making examination of the witness pursuant to subsection (2), the examination of witness shall be made or caused to be
made as if the witness present at the video conference were present
before the court.
In making examination of the witness pursuant to subsection (3), the court shall write down and record the deposition of the
witness on video conference and the matters of the video conference.
The record of examination of a witness through video
conference shall be maintained in the format set forth in Schedule-14.
The expenses incurred in the examination of a witness
pursuant to this Section shall be borne by the party applying for the
examination of the witness through video conference.
187. Power to depute employee to examine witness: (1) If any party of
the case makes a petition to the court to go to the place where a
witness who is unable to appear before the court due to physical
infirmity is residing or staying and examine such a witness and the
petition seems to be reasonable, the court may order for the
examination of such a witness.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
himself or herself may proceed to or depute an office of the concerned
court to the place where such a witness is residing or staying, and the
witness shall be examined, or caused to be examined, by the judge or
employee, as the case may be.
If an employee is deputed pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned employee shall proceed to the place where such a witness
is residing or staying and examine him/her.
The expenses incurred in proceeding of the judge or
deputation by the court of an employee to examine the witness shall
be borne by the person making petition for the examination of the
witness pursuant to sub-section (2).
188. Witness to be examined on due date appointed for parties: (1)
Except in cases referred to in Section 186 or 187, the court shall so
appoint the day for the examination of witnesses that such
examination is made on the due date appointed for the parties to make
presence.
In examining a witness, there shall be prepared a
deposition containing the matters expressed by the witness, and the
deposition shall be signed by him/her and recorded.
189. To take an oath: Prior to making a deposition by a witness who
appears before the court to make such deposition shall take oath
before the judge that he/she will state noting but the truth, in the form
specified in Schedule-15.
190. Deposition taken by judge: (1) The deposition of a witness shall be
taken down by the judge before the bench of whom the examination
of witness is referred to.
In examining the witness pursuant to sub-section (1), the
judge may seek the assistance of required employees to record the
deposition and examine the witness.
191. Witness to be examined on due date appointed: (1) Except in cases
referred to in Section 186 or 187, the deposition of all witnesses in
appearance at the court on the due date appointed for the examination
of witness shall be taken down.
Where, in making examination pursuant to sub-section
(1), it is not possible because of the time factor to complete the taking
down of the deposition of all witnesses in appearance on that day, the
due date for appearance shall, for reasons to be recorded, be so
appointed for the witnesses and parties that the deposition of
witnesses shall be taken down on the next day thereof.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"on the next day thereof" means the first day on which the court
remains open, immediately following the day of the examination of
witness.
192. Deposition to be certified: (1) The judge shall, in examining a
witness, put questions to the witness on the matters as required to be
set out by the witness and record in the deposition such questions and
replies made by the witness to such questions and also the description
of cross examination, if any, made in accordance with law.
After the recording of the description as referred to in
sub-section (1), the court shall ask the witness whether he/she has any
thing else to state on any matter and cause him/her to state such matter,
if any, and set down in the prepared deposition that the examination of
witness has been made in presence of him/her and attending parties of
the case or attorneys and cause it to be signed by him/her.
If the witness, parties of the case or attorneys refuse to
sign the deposition pursuant to sub-section (2), the witness examining
judge shall certify that matter as mentioned by any or all of the
witness, parties of the case or attorneys and record in the case-file of
the concerned case.
While examining a witness, the deposition of a witness
shall be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-16.
193. Remarks to be made and certified: If, in examining a witness
pursuant to this Chapter, the concerned witness does not give or
refuses to give answers to the questions asked by the judge or gives
answers to unrelated matters rather than answers sought by the
questions put to him/her, the judge shall make remarks thereof and
certify the same pursuant to Section 192.
194. Power to examine witness on commission/letter rogetory: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter, if a
witness required to be examined is a resident of another district and
because of his/her physical infirmity he/she is not able to appear in
person and it is not possible to procure his/her presence in the court
trying the case and take his/her deposition, and the concerned party
makes a petition, setting out such matter, to the court for the
examination of such a witness on commission/letter rogetory and the
contents of the petition seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
examine the witness on commission/letter rogetory.
interrogatories
required
asked
commission/letter rogetory pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be framed
in the form set forth in Schedule-17 and certified by the judge and the
commission/letter rogetory shall be sent to the district court of the
district where the witness is staying or residing.
Where a commission/letter rogetory is issued by the
concerned court pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall appoint the
due date for the concerned parties to the case to make presence before
the court examining the witness on commission/letter rogetory and
give information thereof to the concerned court.
Upon receipt of the commission/letter rogetory pursuant
to sub-section (2), the concerned district court shall prepare a
deposition containing the answer to each interrogatory of the
commission/letter rogetory upon fulfilling the procedures pursuant to
this Chapter as if the case were filed in that court, and the judge of the
concerned district court shall certify the deposition pursuant to

Section 192 or 193 and send it to the concerned court that has issued
the commission/letter rogetory.
In fulfilling the procedures of the commission/letter
rogetory pursuant to sub-section (4), the concerned district court shall
give information thereof to the parties of the case or attorneys and
appoint the due date for them to make presence and send them to the
case in which the case has been filed.

Chapter-17
Provisions Relating to Hearings and Judgment
195. Power to make judgment on matter as agreed: (1) On the due date
appointed for the plaintiff and the defendant to make presence after
the submission of the statement of defense, the plaint, the statement of
defense and all documents produced shall be examined in presence of
both parties and shown to them, and the plaintiff and the defendant
shall also be inquired into the matters tat are not clear, and the court
shall consider whether both parties agree or disagree thereon.
If, in making consideration pursuant to sub-section (1), it
appears that the defendant has admitted and agreed to the claims of
the plaintiff, the court may adjudge the case at any time.
196. Power to hold pre-hearing discussions of plaintiff and defendant:
(1) If the court considers it reasonable to hold pre-hearing discussions
of the plaintiff and the defendant in order to ascertain the matter to be
adjudged in the case pursuant to this Chapter, the court may, for
reasons to be recorded, order to hold such discussions.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court shall appoint the due date for that purpose and hold such
discussions.
The plaintiff, defendant or their attorneys and legal
practitioners may attend the meeting referred to in sub-section (2).
On the discussions referred to in sub-section (3), the
plaintiff and the defendant may present claim, counter-claim or
statement of defense and evidence in support or rebuttal of that matter
and their claims or pleas in order to ascertain the matter to be
adjudged in the case.
The court shall ascertain the matter to be adjudged in a
court from the discussions referred to in sub-section (4) and makes an
order to examine evidence if it appears that necessary evidence has to
be examined in that matter.
Where discussions are held pursuant to this Section, the
court shall maintain records thereof and attach the same with the casefile.
197. To hold hearings upon completion of examination of evidence: (1)
The judge shall, upon the completion of the examination of evidence,
hold the hearing and decide the case ordinarily within one month.
In holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
parties of the case may present their respective claims or defense and
pleadings on their own or through legal practitioners or attorneys
appointed by them respectively.
If, in holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), the
court makes an order to present pleading notes in order to clarify the
additional matters in the case, the parties of the case shall present
pleading notes in writing on their own or through legal practitioners or
attorneys appointed by them respectively.
198. To provide opportunity to enter into compromise: (1) If the parties
of a case that is sub judice in the court wish to enter into compromise
at any stage, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
the court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the judge
shall read out the contents of the petition and the meanings and
consequences thereof known to the concerned parties.
If, upon reading out pursuant to sub-section (2), both
parties agree to enter into compromise, the court shall draw up a deed
of compromise in triplicate.
If, in reading out the contents of the deed of compromise
drawn up pursuant to sub-section (3) to the parties, the parties agree to
enter into compromise, it shall be caused to be signed by both parties,
and the judge shall make an order to certify that the deed of
compromise was executed in his/her presence, and one copy thereof
shall be attached with the concerned case-file and one copy each shall
be given to the plaintiff and the defendant.
Where a deed of compromise is executed pursuant to
sub-section (3), no plaint that the party in question is not satisfied with
the deed of compromise shall be entertained except a plaint that the
other party has not complied with the deed of compromise.
If transmission, registration or plotting of immovable
property has to be made pursuant to the deed of compromise, as a
result of the order made to enter into compromise pursuant to subsection (5), the court executing the deed of compromise shall, within
three days, ask the concerned office to carry out the act as referred to
in the deed of compromise.
199. Settlement of dispute through mediation: (1) If the parties of a case
that is sub judice in the court wish to settle the case through mediation,
they may, irrespective of the stage of the case, make a joint petition to
the court for the settlement of dispute through mediation.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and it
appears to be reasonable to settle the dispute through mediation, the
judge trying the case shall make an order to settle the dispute through
mediation.
Notwithstanding anything contained in pursuant to subsection (1) or (2), if the court is of the opinion that it is appropriate to
settle any case that is sub judice in the court through mediation, the
court may, in consultation with the parties, order for the settlement of
the dispute through mediation by the mediator appointed by the court
itself or by the parties themselves.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3), the
dispute has to be settled through mediation in accordance with law.
If the dispute is settled through mediation pursuant to
sub-section (4), the parties shall make a petition to the court,
accompanied thereby by a deed of settlement of dispute through
mediation.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (5), the
court shall execute the deed of compromise between the parties.
The provisions relating to compromise as set forth in subsections (3), (4) and (5) of Section 198 shall also apply mutatis
mutandis to the settlement of dispute pursuant to this Section.
If an order is made for the settlement of a dispute through
mediation pursuant to this Section but the dispute cannot be settled
through mediation, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
to make presence and try, hear and settle such case in accordance with
200. Not to execute compromise or mediation: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 198 or 199, a case instituted upon the
Government of Nepal being plaintiff and a case relating to a public,
government or community property shall not be capable of being
settled by compromise or mediation.
Provided that nothing shall bar the entering into compromise in
such a manner as to maintain the public, government or community
property.
201. Withdrawal of claim: (1) In any case other than a case in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff, the party of the case may, in order
to abandon the claims made by him/her in the plaint, memorandum of
appeal or petition and withdraw such claims or to withdraw the plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition stating that he/she is not able to
prove the claims, make a petition to the court at any time prior to the
hearing of the case.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall make an order to grant leave to withdraw the claims or the plaint,
memorandum of appeal or petition as requested by the petition.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
shall cross of the record of that case.
If the claims or the plaint, memorandum of appeal or
petition are withdrawn pursuant to sub-section (1), the same party
may not make a complaint against the persons made as opposite
parties in the same plaint, memorandum of appeal or petition on the
same matter.
202. Judgment to be made: (1) Subsequent to the completion of the
hearings pursuant to this Chapter, the judge shall make verdict on the
issue to be decided ordinarily on the same day of the completion of
hearings and record the same in the verdict book.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "verdict
book" means a book maintained in the court for the judge to record
precisely the matters decided on a case and the grounds for the same.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where an order is issued to submit a note of pleadings pursuant to subsection (3) of Section 197, verdict shall be made within seven days of
the receipt of the note of pleadings.
If the court, for reasons to be recorded, makes an order
that verdict cannot be made on any matters to be decided on a case
pursuant to sub-section (1) on the same day given that the matters
involve complex legal or factual questions, the due date for
appearance shall be appointed to read out the verdict within fifteen
days in maximum.
Where the due date is appointed pursuant to sub-section
(3), the court shall make verdict on the case on that day, record it in
the verdict book and read out the same to the parties.
203. Matters to be stated in judgment: (1) The judge shall set down the
judgment of a case based on the maters decided pursuant to Section
202 ordinarily within seven days.
The judgments set down pursuant to sub-section (1) state,
inter alia, the following matters:
The short description of the case,
The plaintiff's claims,
The defendant's contentions and defenses,
The evidence produced by the plaintiff and the defendant,
Maters adjudged upon agreement or disagreement
between the parties over the issues,
Points of pleadings made by the party or his/her law
practitioner on the matters referred to in clause (d) or (e)
or the main points of note of pleadings, if any, submitted,
Matters adjudged by the court and grounds for the
adjudging,
Relevant law relied on for adjudging the issue,
Such points of the judgment as required to be executed,
Matter whether the judgment is appealable or not.
A judgment shall be set down in the format set forth in
Schedule-18.
The judge shall sign and authenticate the judgment as
referred to in sub-section (3).
204. Prohibition on amendment to judgment: After the authentication of
a judgment by the judgment as referred to in Section 203, no
amendment shall be made to it, except correction of minor errors in
such a manner as not to alter the verdict.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term "minor
errors" means such difference between a figure and word contained in
the judgment, error on the reference of any one of the names,
surnames and addresses of the plaintiff, defendant or witness and
minor typo or printing error as not to differ or alter the matters
adjudged and the verdict.
205. Deed to be executed on hearing of judgment: (1) Where a case is
heard and adjudged by the court, the judgment shall be read out to the
parties of the case, if they are present, and a deed shall be caused to be
executed by them to the effect that they have heard the judgment and
be attached with the case-file.
If a party is not present as mentioned in sub-section (1)
but his/her attorney is present, then such a deed shall be caused to be
executed by the attorney.
In the case of a party who is not present at the time of
reading out the judgment pursuant to sub-section (1), the court passing
the judgment shall, on its own or through the lower court, serve the
time-limit for appeal, along with the notice of judgment, in the form
set forth in Schedule-19, on that party within three days of the
preparation of the judgment.

Chapter-18
Provisions Relating to Suspension and Transfer of Cases
206. Power to suspend cases: (1)
Where any party to any case, out of
several cases filed in several courts, makes a petition to the court,
showing a reason that the disposal of one case cannot be, or ought not
to be, made until any other case is disposed of, or that judgment of
one case will have substantial effect on the judgment of any other case
or where the court deems that matter, on its own initiative, in the
course of proceeding, the court may order, on reasons to be recorded,
that such a case be suspended.
If an order is made to suspend any case pursuant to subsection (1), the court shall give information of that matter to the
parties of the case, and also give information thereof to the concerned
court in which another related case is filed.
Upon receipt of the information referred to in sub-section
(2), the concerned court shall, upon disposal of the related case filed
in it, give information thereof, accompanied by a copy of the
judgment, to the court suspending the case pursuant to sub-section (2)
within thirty days after the date of judgment.
If, upon the disposal of the case pursuant to sub-section
(3), the parties to the case are on recognizance and the due date has to
be appointed for the parties to appear on the court suspending the case,
the court shall appoint such date for the parties to make appearance
before the court suspending the case and send them to that court.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Section, if
different courts hold divergent views on which of the cases sub judice
in such courts should be suspended, the courts shall make reports to
the court hearing appeals from the concerned courts.
Where a report has been sent pursuant to sub-section (5),
the appellate court shall make an appropriate order on that matter and
the concerned court shall act in accordance with that order.
207. Revival of suspended case: (1) If a case suspended pursuant to

Section 206 has to be revived and proceeded, any party of the case
may make a petition, accompanied by the reason for the revival, to the
court.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1) and the
grounds appear to be reasonable, the court may revive and hear the
case suspended as prayed for by the petition.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if information is received that the case suspended in another
court has been adjudged or there is no reason to continue the
suspension of the case, the court shall revive and proceed the
suspended case.
In suspending the case, the parties on recognizance shall
be dispensed with the requirement to make presence on the appointed
due date. In reviving the suspended case, the parties on recognizance
shall be summoned by giving them a time-limit of seven days, and the
case shall be proceeded.
208. Powers to transfer cases: (1) If a court makes a report to the
Supreme Court, setting out the reason for any obstruction to or
hindrance with the settlement by the court of any case filed in it and
yet to be settled and the reason seems to be reasonable, the Supreme
Court may order another court of equal jurisdiction to proceed, hear,
try and adjudicate such a case.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), such
a court shall proceed, hear, try and adjudicate the case pursuant to that
order.
Provided that an appeal against the judgment made by such a
court shall lie with the court hearing appeals from the court in which
the plaint was originally filed.
209. Power of Supreme Court to hear and adjudicate case:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if, on the
petition of any party of a case or the report of the concerned court in
which the case is filed, the Supreme Court is of the opinion that, in
view of the fact that the case involves some complex constitutional
question or legal question of public importance or concern or related
to interpretation it will be appropriate to have the case heard and
adjudicated or any constitutional or legal question involved in the case
decided by the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court shall, for the
reasons to be recorded, make an order to call for such a case and hear
and adjudicate it by itself.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
file of such a case shall be forwarded to the Supreme Court and
information thereof shall be given to the parties of the case and date to
appear shall be appointed.
Where an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
Supreme Court may hear and settle such a case or decide any
constitutional or legal question involved in that case, and remand the
case-file to the concerned court for the disposal of the rest matters.

Chapter-19
Provisions Relating to Appeal
210. Appeal to lie: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, a
party who is not satisfied with a judgment made by the court of first
instance may make appeal to the concerned appellate court within
thirty days from the date of knowledge of the judgment.
The time-limit for appeal shall begin within thirty days
after the date of the deed executed to the effect of hearing the
judgment where a party of an appealable case or his/her attorney,
being present in the court, has heard the judgment, or after the date of
the service of the notice of judgment, if any, where the party has not
so appeared.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),
even though a deed is not executed to the effect of hearing the
judgment or the notice of judgment made is not served, the party of
the case shall make an appeal within thirty days after the date of
receipt of the duplicate copy of the judgment of the court within one
year of the judgment of the case.
211. Circumstances where appeal cannot lie: Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 210, no appeal shall lie in any of the following
circumstances;
Where the time-limit has been expired without
submitting the statements of defense or without making
defense after the receipt of the summons or after the
service of the summons,
Where the case has been compromised or mediated,
Where the plaint has been withdrawn,
Where the plaint has been dismissed.
Provided that an appeal may be made in the case of the plaint
being dismissed unduly.
212. Requirement to pay court fees in making appeal: An evidence of
payment of the court fees leviable in making an appeal pursuant to
law shall be submitted with the memorandum of appeal.
Provided that where an appeal is tendered for registration with
the leave of court subject to the payment of the court fees at the time
of the judgment of the case, the appeal shall be registered despite that
an evidence of the payment of the court fees is not produced.
213. Matters to be stated in memorandum of appeal: (1) While making
a memorandum of appeal, it shall be made, accompanied by a
certified duplicate copy of the judgment, to the court hearing appeals
from the court that has made the judgment, stating, inter alia, the
following matters:
A short description of the case,
The court and judge making the judgment,
Details of the time-limit for making appeal,
Grounds on which the judgment is based,
Appeal pleas and grounds thereof,
Legal basis for making appeal,
Legal basis in support of the appeal pleas,
Appeal fees.
In making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal shall be
written in descent language, and be accompanied by necessary
documents proving the pleas of appeal.
The memorandum of appeal shall be in the form set forth
in Schedule-20.
There shall be charged the appeal fees of two hundred
rupees while making an appeal.
214. Appeal required to be made to court hearing appeal: (1) In
making an appeal, the memorandum of appeal as referred to in

Section 213 shall be prepared and registered.
Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
registration pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall examine
whether the matters referred to in Section 213 are stated in the
memorandum of appeal or not, whether it is made within the timelimit as referred to in sub-section (2) or (3) of Section 210 or not,
whether it is in the specified form or not, whether the fee as specified
by the court is paid or not and whether the court fees are to be paid or
not, and register it if it meets the requirements and give a receipt in
the form set forth in Schedule-3 to the concerned party.
If, in examining a memorandum of appeal pursuant to
sub-section (2), it does not seem to meet the requirements for any
reason, the concerned court shall, for the reasons to be recorded, not
register the memorandum of appeal and shall make endorsement on it.
215. Memorandum of appeal may be filed in court adjudging case: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 214, a memorandum
of appeal may also be registered through the court adjudging the case.
Where a memorandum of appeal is tendered for
filing/registration pursuant to sub-section (1), such a court shall file
the memorandum of appeal in fulfillment of the procedures as referred
to in Section 214.
The memorandum of appeal tendered for registration
pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be sent, accompanied by the
concerned case-file, to the court hearing appeal within three days.
If the appellant who has filed a memorandum of appeal
pursuant to this Section wishes to be on recognizance, the due date
shall be appointed for appearance in the concerned court hearing
appeal.
216. Appeal by government employee to concerned court: (1)
If any
government employee is to make an appeal on a case involving
his/her right, interest and concern and is not able to appear in person
in the court hearing appeal owing to a government business, he/she
may file the appeal, setting out the reasons, through such type of court
hearing appeal, if any, available in the area where he/she is in service
or failing such a court, through the district court in the area where
he/she is in service.
If an appeal is tendered for filing pursuant to sub-section
(1), such a court shall file the appeal in fulfillment of the procedures
as referred to in Section 214.
If an appeal is filed pursuant to sub-section (2), the court
filing the memorandum of appeal shall send such a memorandum of
appeal, along with certification of the filing of the memorandum of
appeal and the concerned employee making appeal is in service in that
area, to the concerned court hearing appeal within three days.
If a government employee making appeal pursuant to this
Section wishes to remain on recognizance, the court filing the
memorandum of appeal shall hold him/her on recognizance and send
information thereof to the concerned court hearing appeal.
217. Calling for case-file: (1) Upon the registration of an appeal in the
court hearing appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court shall call for
the case-file of the concerned case within three days.
If the case-file is called for pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned court shall send the case-file to the court hearing appeal
within three days of the receipt of letter.
218. To make order to respondent to make presence: (1)
After receipt
of the case-file from the lower court pursuant to Section 217, the court
hearing appeal shall, within fifteen days, hold hearings as to whether
the case has to be tried by summoning the presence of the respondent
as prayed by the appellant or not.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1), it
does not seem that the verdict made by the lower court will be
reversed, the court hearing appeal shall adjudge as so held.
If, upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) and
in consideration of the case upon appeal, it seems that the verdict
made by the lower court may be reversed, the court hearing appeal
shall, for the reasons to be recorded, order to summon the presence of
the respondent for hearings.
219. Service of summons on respondent: (1)
Where an order is made
pursuant to sub-section (3) of Section 218, the summons as referred to
in that order shall be served, in the form set forth in Schedule-21.
The summons as referred to in sub-section (1) may be
served by the court hearing appeal itself or through the court making
judgment in the case originally in fulfillment of the procedures as
referred to in Chapter-8.
If the summons is served pursuant to sub-section (2), the
respondent may, if he/she so wishes, submit defenses in writing to the
court hearing appeal.
If the respondent so wishes, the case shall be tried, heard
and settled by holding him/her on recognizance.
220. Hearing of appeal: (1) After the service of the summons pursuant
to sub-section (1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall
appoint the day for hearing where the respondent is present and both
the appellant and the respondent are on recognizance and hear the
appeal on that day, and even though both parties or either party are/is
not on recognizance, the court hearing appeal shall appoint the due
date or day for hearing the appeal and hear the appeal on that date or
After the service of the summons pursuant to sub-section
(1) of Section 219, the court hearing appeal shall hear the appeal
despite that the respondent is not present.
Upon holding hearings pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2),
verdict shall be made as so be held.
While delivering an appellate judgment, it shall be made
in the format as referred to in Schedule-22.
221. Powers of the court hearing appeal: Upon hearing a case n the
appellate level pursuant to Section 220, the court hearing appeal shall
make any of the following decisions:
To uphold or withhold the judgment of the lower court;
To reverse partially or fully the judgment delivered by
the lower court;
Where the judgment has been made by the lower court
without examining such evidence as required to have
been examined, to make such examination by itself or to
order the lower court to make such examination,
If any particular matter required to have been adjudged
(fact in issue) in the case has not been adjudged, to make
such adjudgment itself or order the lower court to
adjudge such matter;
To make any consequential or incidental amendment to
the judgment of the lower court.
222. To exercise of powers of court of first instance: In trying, hearing
or adjudging a case on appeal pursuant to this Chapter, the court
hearing appeal may exercise the powers exercisable by the court of
first instance.
223. Synchronization of hearings and judgments: (1) Where various
parties have made separate appeals against the decision made by the
lower court on the same case, hearings of all appeals shall be
synchronized and judgment passed as so held.
Even though, in making a decision pursuant to subsection (1), any appeal has already been decided for any reason, the
case shall be adjudged upon the remaining appeals as so held as if
such appeal were not adjudged previously.

Chapter-20
Revision and Review of Cases
224. Revision of cases: (1) If the concerned party makes a petition to the
Supreme Court within thirty days, excluding the time required for
journey, after the date of a judgment or final order, setting out that
such a judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court on a case
not appealable to the Supreme Court pursuant to law contains any of
the following circumstances, the Supreme Court may conduct the
revision of the judgment or final order made by the Appellate Court:
If the judgment or final order involves error in the
interpretation of the Constitution or law,
If any legal principle established by the Supreme Court
has not been followed or has been applied with wrong
interpretation;
If irrelevant law has been used;
If any government or public property is misappropriated
or any loss is caused to such a property or ownership or
possession of a person is established in an unauthorized
manner over such a property due to lack of proper and
exact evaluation of the evidence contained in the case file
of a case involving dispute relating to such government
or public property.
If a petition is received for the revision of a case pursuant
to sub-section (1), the Supreme Court shall conduct hearings on
whether the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in the
judgment or final order of the Appellate Court or not.
If, on conducting hearing pursuant to sub-section (2), it
appears that the judgment or final order of the Appellate Court
contains the circumstance referred to in sub-section (1), the Supreme
Court shall order the presence of the other parties of such a case in
order to conduct the revision of the case.
If the other parties of the case appear pursuant to subsection (3), the Supreme Court shall also conduct hearing for revision,
also in presence of them, and pass judgment on the case.
225. Power to review: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere
in this Code, the Supreme Court may review its judgment or final
order in any of the following circumstances:
If the party has come to discover or know any evidence
or fact likely to materially affect the judgment or final
order only after the judgment or final order has been
made,
If it appears that the judgment or final order has been
passed contrary to the precedent or legal principle
enunciated by the Supreme Court prior to the passing of
the judgment or final order, as the case may be.
If any circumstance referred to in sub-section (1) exists in
the judgment or final order made by the Supreme Court, the party of
case may make a petition, setting out the reasons, to the Supreme
Court for review within thirty five days of the knowledge by no later
than one year after the date of the passing of the judgment or final
order.
If, on examining the petition received pursuant to subsection (2), it contents seem to be reasonable, the Supreme Court shall
make an order to review the case.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, the Supreme Court shall not review its judgment or final
order in any of the following circumstances:
If the judgment or final order has once been reviewed in
accordance with law,
If the questions raised by the petition for review were
also raised in the Division Bench of the Supreme Court
and they were heard by the Full Bench because the
Judges were divided in their opinions thereon, and
decision was already made by addressing those questions,
If the case has already been settled by way of revision
pursuant
prevailing
prior
commencement of this Code,
If the judgment of the Appellate Court has been upheld in
the case reviewed pursuant to Section 224.
226. Case to be settled being confined to relevant matters: In
conducting the revision of a case pursuant to Section 224 or review of
a case pursuant to Section 225, the case shall be adjudicated being
confined only to such grounds and relevant matters as on which the
Supreme Court has made an order to revise or review the case, as the
case may be.

Chapter-21
Provisions Relating to Mutual Legal Assistance
227. Power to make order to serve summons: (1) If, on any case filed in
a court, any summons is to be served on any person who is living or
residing in a foreign country, the court may make an order for that
purpose.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
shall make a submission, accompanied by the following matters, to
the central body to serve such a summons on the person who is living
or residing in a foreign country:
Full name of the person on whom the summons has to be
served,
The country where the person as referred to in clause (a)
is living or residing, the local address of him/her and
other description setting out his/her identity (his/her
passport number, identity card number etc.),
If the summons cannot be served on the address of the
person as referred to in clause (a), the country of the
enterprise where he/she works or which he/she operates,
and the address thereof,
Details in relation to which case the summons has to be
served.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"central body" means any such body as may be designated by
the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
Where a submission is made pursuant to sub-section (2),
the central body shall translate the court order and the details in the
English language and make a request to the concerned country
through diplomatic channels.
If, in making a request pursuant to sub-section (3), any
treaty has not been concluded with such a country for that purpose and,
for the service of such a summons in the concerned country, any
assurance has to be made by Nepal to the effect that the summons of
similar nature issued by the competent court of such a country in the
future will be served in Nepal on the basis of reciprocity, the central
body may make such assurance through diplomatic channels.
If information is received from the country requested for
pursuant to sub-section (3) that the summons has been served on the
concerned person, the summons shall be deemed to have been duly
served on that person.
If the country requested for pursuant to sub-section (3)
refuses to serve the summons or such a country gives information to
the central body through diplomatic channels that the summons has
not been served for the reason that such a person could not be found
or identified, the contents of such summons shall be published in a
daily newspaper of national circulation in the country where such a
person is living or residing or in Nepal.
Where a summons is served pursuant to sub-section (6),
the summons shall be deemed to have been duly served.
228. Request may be made to effect service of judicial document issued
by foreign court: (1) If any judicial document issued by a foreign
court has to be served on any person who is residing or living in Nepal,
the concerned foreign country shall, pursuant to the order of such a
court, make a request to the central body through diplomatic channels.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"judicial document" means any such document like a summons, plaint
or statement of claims, petition or memorandum of appeal issued by
any foreign court.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the
following matters:
The foreign court making order to serve the judicial
document in Nepal,
Details of the case in the context of which such order has
been made,
Details of the judicial document to be served,
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary
details to identify, the person on whom the document
referred to in sub-section (1) has to be served,
Details of which procedure or manner has to be followed
to effect the service of such a judicial document.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) has to be
accompanied by a memorandum set down for the service of the
judicial document in the format set forth in Schedule-23 and the
document to be served.
The request and the judicial document to be served or its
authentic copy referred to in sub-section (3) has to be in duplicate.
229. Service of judicial document: (1) Upon receipt of a request referred
to in Section 228, the central body shall study whether the request of a
foreign court meets the requisite terms or not and whether any judicial
document can be served in Nepal accordingly or not.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
that the judicial document issued by such a foreign court cannot be
served in Nepal, the central body shall give information, accompanied
by the reasons for the same, to the concerned country through
diplomatic channels.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
appropriate to serve the judicial document issued by such a foreign
court in Nepal pursuant to the request by the foreign court, the central
body shall request the concerned court to serve such a document.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"concerned court" means the district court of the area where the
person on whom the judicial document has to be served is residing or
living.
If a court is requested by the central body to serve any
judicial document pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall proceed
to serve such a judicial document as if the judicial proceeding were
sub judice in that court.
In serving a judicial document pursuant to sub-section (4),
it shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.
If, in effecting the service pursuant to sub-section (5),
any judicial document has to be served in pursuant of any specific
procedure or manner as per the request of the foreign court and
request is made accordingly by the central body, the concerned court
shall also pursue such procedures or manner.
After the service of any judicial document pursuant to
sub-section (5) or (6), the concerned court shall prepare a description
of the service of such a document in the format set forth in Schedule24 and forward it to the central body.
If the details of service received pursuant to sub-section
(7) has to be translated into the English language as per the request of
the foreign court, the central body shall translate it and certify the
original copy received from the concerned court and the translated
copy and send the same to the requesting foreign country through
diplomatic channels.
230. Taking of evidence abroad: (1) If, on any case that is sub judice in a
court, it is necessary to take any evidence outside Nepal, the court
may make an order for that purpose.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall make a submission to the central body.
Where a submission is made by the court pursuant to
sub-section (2), the central body shall set down the details of evidence
to be taken in the form set forth in Schedule-25 and make a request to
the concerned country, through diplomatic channels, to effect the
taking of evidence by the concerned authority of that country.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if a request has been made to effect the taking of an evidence
pursuant to this Section and the concerned foreign country has refused
to take evidence or the evidence has not been taken by the competent
authority of such a country, nothing shall bar the adjudging of the case
by examining the other available evidence by that reason only.
231. Power to take evidence as per request of foreign court: (1) If any
evidence has to be taken in Nepal in relation to any case that is sub
judice in any foreign court or body, such court shall make a request to
the central body through diplomatic channels.
The request referred to in sub-section (1) for taking an
evidence shall state the following matters:
The foreign court or body making request to effect the
taking of evidence,
Where the court or body requested to effect the taking of
evidence in Nepal is identified, details thereof,
Nature of the case in relation to which request is made to
effect the taking of evidence,
Details of the parties of the case and their attorneys or
representatives,
Details of the evidence or other judicial action to be
taken in Nepal,
If any witness has to be examined in Nepal, the name,
surname and address of such a witness,
If any witness has to be examined in Nepal by a letter
rogetory, the details of interrogatories to be asked to
him/her,
Whether the witness has to take an oath on making
deposition, the details thereof,
If any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
examination of any document, movable or immovable
property has to be made in Nepal, the details thereof,
Other necessary details.
232. Request to be in Nepali language: A request made to take evidence
pursuant to Section 231 shall be set down in the Nepali language.
Provided that if a request is set down in any foreign language
and it is not practicable to translate it into the Nepali language and,
upon showing the reasons for the same, the original copy in the
English language or its formal translation in English from another
language is attached, such a request shall be acceptable to the central
body or the concerned court, as the case may be.
233. To be sent to the concerned court: (1) Upon receipt of a request
referred to in Section 231, the central body shall study whether it is
appropriate to take evidence in Nepal or not.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
appropriate to take evidence in Nepal pursuant to the request by the
foreign country, the central body shall request the concerned court to
take evidence in accordance with the request.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"concerned court" means the following court to take the following
evidence:
Where any witness has to be examined or replies to the
letter rogetory prepared, the district court of the area
where such a witness or person is residing or living,
Where any inspection, survey, measurement, map or
examination of any movable or immovable property has
to be made or the description thereof prepared, the
district court of the area where such a property is situated,
Where details relating to any document has to be set out,
the district court of the area where the government or
non-government office or the person in custody of that
document is situated or is living or residing.
If, upon studying pursuant to sub-section (1), it appears
that the evidence cannot be taken in Nepal as per the request, the
central body shall give information thereof, setting out details thereof,
to the concerned authority of the requesting country, through the
diplomatic channels.
234. The concerned court to take evidence: (1) If
central
request the concerned court to take evidence of any matter as per the
request of a foreign court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 233,
the concerned court shall proceed to take such evidence as if such an
evidence were taken on the proceedings of any case sub-judice in that
court.
Where a time-limit has to be given to any witness or
person to appear before the court pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall give the time-limit of a maximum of seven days,
excluding the time required for journey, and such a summons of timelimit shall be served in accordance with Chapter-8.
In taking evidence pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall take evidence being confined to such matter as
on which the witness has to be examined or to such interrogatories as
on which replies of letter regotary have to be prepared or to such
evidence, document or movable or immovable property as the
description of which has to be given, as per the request of the foreign
court.
If, in examining a witness or preparing replies of a letter
regotary or examining a document or evidence, the parties of the case
on which evidence is to be taken pursuant to this Section or their
attorneys or law practitioners wish to appear before the court, the
concerned may grant a leave to such parties, attorneys or law
practitioners to appear before the court at the time of taking evidence.
In taking evidence pursuant to this Section, the concerned
court shall apply the laws of Nepal.
Provided that if the foreign court has made a request to take
evidence of any specific subject by adopting any specific procedures
or manner on any specific matter and it is requested by the central
body to take evidence accordingly, the concerned court shall have to
take evidence accordingly.
235. To send evidence taken to foreign court: (1) The concerned court
shall send the evidence taken pursuant to Section 234 to the central
body.
If the evidence received pursuant to sub-section (1) has to
be translated into any foreign language as per the request of the
foreign court, the central body shall translate it accordingly and send
the same to the foreign court through diplomatic channels.
236. Expenditure to be borne: If any expenditure to be incurred in
serving a summons or taking any request in pursuance of a request
made by a foreign court pursuant to this Chapter, the requesting court
shall bear such an expenditure.
237. Recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments: (1) Any
judgment made by a court of any foreign country shall be recognized
in Nepal and may be enforced in Nepal, in the following
circumstance:
If such a judgment has been made by a competent court
with proper jurisdiction,
If such a judgment is enforceable in the concerned
country,
If such a judgment is final and not subject to review in
accordance with the law of the concerned country.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
the judgment made by the court of foreign country shall not be
recognized and enforced in Nepal in the following circumstance:
If such a judgment seems to be deceptive or fraudulent
from procedural viewpoint,
If there has been filed and sub judice in a court of Nepal
a case between the same parties for the same fact and
purpose as on which such a judgment has been passed,
prior to the case being filed in the foreign court,
If the case referred to in clause (b) has already been
adjudged by a court of Nepal,
If the case referred to in clause (b) has been adjudged by
a court of another country, and such a judgment has been
recognized and already enforced or being in the process
of enforcement in Nepal,
If such a judgment has been passed without giving
adequate opportunity to any party of the case to represent
himself or herself fairly,
If such a judgment seems to have been passed without
following due process required for the proceedings of a
case.
238. Petition to be made for enforcement of judgment passed by
foreign court: (1) Any party who wishes to have a judgment passed
by a foreign court recognized and enforced in Nepal has to make a
petition, accompanied by the following documents, to the concerned
appellate court:
A full and certified text of the judgment,
If the judgment has been made in the absence of any
party of the case, the original or certified copy of the
document establishing that the summons has been duly
issued on such a party,
All documents establishing that the judgment has
fulfilled the terms as referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of
sub-section (1) of Section 237,
Where the judgment is not set down in the Nepalese
language, a Nepalese translated version of the judgment,
along with certification by the diplomatic or consul
representative or by a person authorized to do formal
translation of the judgment.
If a petition referred to in sub-section (1) is received, the
appellate court, upon studying such a petition, is satisfied that the
judgment passed by a foreign court fulfills the terms as referred to in
sub-section (1) of Section 237 and that there is no reason to refuse to
recognize it pursuant to sub-section (2) of the same Section, the court
shall forward the judgment passed by the foreign court to the
concerned district court to recognize and enforce it.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
"concerned district court" means the district court of the area/territory
where any amount in question, partition and foreclosure, as well, have
to be recovered, effected or made, as the case may be, pursuant to the
judgment.
239. Judgment to be executed by district court: If so written by the
appellate court pursuant to sub-section (2) of Section 238, the
concerned district court shall enforce the judgment as if it were one
passed by itself.
240. Compromise between parties: (1) If a petition is made for the
enforcement of a foreign judgment in Nepal pursuant to Section 238,
and the parties wish to enter into a compromise by enforcing the
judgment with mutual consent, they may make a joint petition to the
concerned court, setting out the details including the terms and
conditions of such compromise.
If a petition is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned court shall effect compromise to enforce the judgment with
the consent in pursuance of the petition.
If compromise is effected pursuant to sub-section (2), the
concerned parties shall enforce the judgment in pursuance of the
mutual consent.
241. Non-enforcement in absence of treaty: (1) In order to serve a
summons issued by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, take
evidence in Nepal at the request of any foreign court or enforce a
judgment passed by a court of any foreign country in Nepal, there
shall be a bilateral treaty concluded between Nepal and such a foreign
country.
If any treaty has not been concluded pursuant to subsection (1), notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, a summons issued by such a court cannot be served,
evidence cannot be taken at the request of such a court or a judgment
passed by such a court cannot be enforced in Nepal.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if
any foreign country makes a request, through diplomatic channels, to
the Government of Nepal for the service of a summons issued by a
court of a foreign country on any specific case or for the taking of
evidence as per the request of the court of such a country, and that
country gives assurances through diplomatic channels that it will
serve a summons issued by any court of Nepal on similar type of case
or take evidence as per the request of any court of Nepal in that
country in the future, the summons issued by the court of such a
country can be served or evidence can be taken at the request of that
court on the basis of reciprocity.
Where assurance has been made or summons served or
evidence taken pursuant to sub-section (3), the central body shall
maintain records thereof.
242. Non-enforcement: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in
this Chapter, if it would be contrary to public order or sovereignty of
Nepal in serving a summons issued by a court of any foreign country
in Nepal or taking evidence in Nepal at the request of such a court or
enforcing a judgment passed by such a court or as a result of such
service or enforcement, no such summons may be served, evidence
taken or judgment enforced.

Chapter-22
Execution of Judgments
243. Records to be prepared: (1)
Where any judgment is made by the
court ordering the foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of
records, transmission, preemption, partition, recovery of amount in
question, realization of fine or court fees, the concerned court shall, as
soon as possible, prepare the records thereof and forward the same to
the bailiff section.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, the term
"amount in question" means any amount including compensation as
required to be recovered pursuant to the judgment.
Upon receipt of the records pursuant to sub-section (1),
the concerned employee shall create a separate case-file on it,
accompanied by a copy of the judgment, for the purpose of the
execution of judgment.
Where the records referred to in sub-section (2) are
prepared by the court hearing appeal, the concerned employee shall
forward the case-file, accompanied by the records, to the concerned
district court within a period of seven days of the preparation of the
judgment.
244. Execution by concerned district court: (1) The district court where
the plaint or complaint has been filed shall execute the judgment
passed on such a case irrespective of the level of court passing the
judgment.
The concerned district court shall execute the judgment
on a case originally tried and settled by the court hearing appeal.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the district court executing the judgment cannot be
ascertained owing to the subject-matter of the case, the district court
designated by the court hearing appeal shall execute the judgment of
that case.
Provided that the judgment passed by any authority other than
the regular court shall be executed by the concerned authority.
245. Postponement of execution of judgment: Notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 243, the court shall postpone the execution of
judgment in the following circumstance:
If an appeal is made in a case which is appealable
pursuant to law, until the case is finally disposed on
appeal,
If no such appeal is made, until the period allowed for
preferring appeal is expired;
If an order is made to summon the presence of parties in
the court of revision of case pursuant to Section 224,
until it is disposed,
If an order is made to make the review of a case pursuant
to Section 225, until it is finally disposed.
246. Not to bar execution of judgment or deed of compromise:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
nothing shall bar the execution of judgment or deed of compromise in
the following circumstance:
In cases where a case is sub judice in a court in
pursuance of a petition made by a party to have a
judgment on any case reviewed or revised, except as
otherwise ordered by the court, to execute the judgment
passed on that case by the reason only that such a petition
has been made,
Even though a case to withhold a judgment or a deed of
compromise is filed by any one, except as otherwise
ordered by the court, to execute the judgment or deed of
compromise on that case,
If it appears that the property remaining as the subject
matter of a case will get damaged if the judgment of any
case is not executed immediately or if the winning party
of a case involving payment of compensation makes a
written commitment to bear compensation for any loss
caused to the other party if the winning party looses the
case on appeal subsequently, to execute such a judgment
by the court prior to the expiration of the time-limit for
appeal in such a case or prior to passing of judgment on
appeal,
If the parties of case agree on some matters of any case
that is sub judice in the court and the matters so agreed
can be separated and executed accordingly, and order is
made by the court to that effect.
147. Appointment of attorney: If any party of the case is not able to
appear in person in the course of execution of judgment, such a party
may assign and send an attorney for that purpose.
148. Opportunity to be given to enter into compromise or mediation:
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Chapter,
if the parties wish to execute the judgment through a compromise or
mediation, they may make a joint petition, setting out that matter, to
the court.
Provided that no petition may be made for compromise or
mediation on the matter of recovery of a government amount in
question.
If a petition is received from the parties for compromise
or mediation pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall specify the
period of execution and provide them with an opportunity to execute
the judgment through a compromise or mediation.
If the parties agree to execute the judgment through a
compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant to subsection (2), the court shall effect the compromise between the parties
in accordance with law.
If the parties do not agree to execute the judgment
through a compromise or mediation within the period given pursuant
to sub-section (2), the court shall have to execute the judgment in
pursuance of the procedures as referred to in this Chapter.
249. Parties to remain on recognizance: (1) Where the court of first
instance passing judgment on a case passes judgment ordering the
foreclosure, entry into records, striking off of records, transmission,
preemption, partition and recovery of amount in question, among
others and the parties of case are present in the court, the court shall
so appoint the due date for the parties to make presence for the
purpose of executing the judgment that the date falls after the period
of expiration of the time-limit for appeal.
If an appeal is made on the case by the date appointed
pursuant to sub-section (1), the court shall discontinue the
recognizance of the parties.
Where a final judgment is made also by the court hearing
appeal to do as set forth in sub-section (1) and the parties of a case are
present in the court, the court shall appoint the due date for the parties
to make presence for the purpose of executing the judgment and ask
the parties to make presence before the concerned court of first
instance and send the case-file to the latter court if the parties of the
case are not present in the court.
If the parties of case make presence before the court of
first instance pursuant to sub-section (3), the court shall hold the
parties who are present on recognizance for the purpose of executing
the judgment.
If intimation is received from the court hearing appeal
that the parties are not on recognizance pursuant to sub-section (3),
parties are not present on the appointed due date or the case becomes
final upon the judgment of court not being appealed and the parties of
a case are not present in the court, the court of first instance shall issue
a summons of twenty one days in the form set forth in Schedule-23
for the parties to make presence in the court for the purpose of
executing the judgment.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if it is not necessary to hold any party on recognizance in the
course of execution of judgment, the court shall not hold such a party
on recognizance.
250. Power to execute judgment upon collecting additional fees: (1) If a
party of a case shows up for the execution of judgment after the
expiration of the time-limit for the undertaking to continue the case or
the extension of the expired time-limit, the court shall execute the
judgment by collecting the additional fees of ten percent of the fees
chargeable for the execution of judgment if it is within six months of
the expiration of the time-limit and of twenty five percent thereof if it
is within one year of such expiration.
If the party is not present to have a judgment executed
even within the period as referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall
close the proceedings relating to the execution of such a judgment,
except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter.
251. Continuity of case or extension of expired due date: (1) If any party
of the case dies in the course of execution of a judgment, his/her heir
may undertake to continue such a case pursuant to this Code.
If any party of the case expires the appointed due date in
the course of execution of a judgment, he/she may extend the expired
appointed due date pursuant to this Code.
252. Procedures for effecting foreclosure: (1) If, in the course of
foreclosing in pursuance of a judgment, the party shall be caused to
pay to the court three percent of the amount in question of the
property subject to foreclosure if such an amount is set out as fees
prior to the deputation of a commission for the foreclosure effected by
the court.
If the party entitled to foreclosure pays the amount to the
court within the time referred to in sub-section (1), the court shall on
the same day of payment of amount appoint the day on which a
commission to effect foreclosure is to be dispatched and give a notice
thereof to the parties and appoint the due date for them to make
presence at the place where the foreclosure is to be effected; and if the
person to allow the foreclosure is not on recognizance, the court shall
also give a notice of that matter to such a party.
In appointing the due date or giving notice pursuant to
sub-section (2), if the property to be foreclosed is a house or land, a
notice shall also be given to vacate such a house or land.
If the property to be foreclosed is in possession or
custody of a person other than the parties of the case, the court shall
also give a notice to such a person to appear at the place where the
commission is deputed.
The court shall depute a commission on the day
appointed pursuant to sub-section (2) and foreclose such a property in
pursuance of the judgment.
If the direction or side of any house or land to be
foreclosed in pursuance of the judgment is not set out, the court shall
effect the foreclosure of such a house or land by lot upon making
proportionate division in presence of the parties.
In effecting the foreclosure pursuant to this Section, the
court shall effect it in presence of the party obliged to allow the
foreclosure and the party entitled to the foreclosure or their
representatives and in witness of a representative of the local body
and at least two witnesses.
If the person obliged to allow the foreclosure or any other
person causes obstruction or hindrance to the foreclosure, the court
shall effect the foreclosure by using force as required.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the house or shop containing the property to be foreclosed
is locked up and the person in possession or custody of the house or
shop to be foreclosed is present, the foreclosure shall be effected by
asking the person to open the house or shop; and if such a person is
not present, a notice, in the format set forth in Schedule-27, shall be
affixed to the door of that house or shop, thereby requiring that person
to vacate the house or shop within fifteen days.
(10) If the concerned person does not open the key of the
house or shop within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (9), the
court shall after the expiration of such a time-limit effect the
foreclosure of the house or shop by breaking the lock of such a house
or shop.
(11) If any property is found within the house or shop in the
course of effecting foreclose pursuant to this Section, the court shall at
the same time prepare an inventory of the property and may take
control of such property.
(12) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
property taken in control pursuant to sub-section (11) within thirty
five days, the court shall auction such a property and immediately
hand over the proceeds of auction to the concerned person.
(13) If the concerned person refuses to receive immediately
the proceeds of auction made pursuant to sub-section (12), the court
shall credit such proceeds into the deposit account.
(14) If the concerned person shows up to receive the amount
within one year after the crediting of the amount into the deposit
account pursuant to sub-section (13), the court shall refund the
amount remaining after deduction of ten percent therefrom to such a
person.
(15) If the concerned person does not show up to receive such
an amount within the period referred to in sub-section (14), the court
shall credit such an amount to the government fund.
(16) Where foreclosure is effected once but any person makes
hindrance and does not allow the foreclosure of the property, the court
shall punish such a person with a fine of up to twenty five thousand
rupees or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months
for each instance, and again effect the foreclosure in relation to the
property previously foreclosed in accordance with the judgment. No
fee shall be payable for effecting foreclosure in such a case.
(17) If the property to be foreclosed is situated in another
territory, the court shall appoint the due date for the concerned parties
for effecting foreclosure and send the case file and parties to the
district court of such a territory.
(18) If a request is made to effect the foreclosure pursuant to
sub-section (17), the concerned court shall effect the foreclosure
pursuant to law and give information thereof to that court.
(19) After the foreclosure has been effected by the court
pursuant to this Section, the court shall give a documentary evidence
thereof to the party entitled to the foreclosure.
(20) The court shall complete the effecting of foreclosure
within six months after the presence of the parties in the court.
253. Procedures for effecting entry into and striking off of records and
transmission: (1) If, in the course of making entry into and striking
of records and transmission, in pursuance of a judgment, the party
entitled to obtain the same is in attendance in the court pursuant to

Section 249, the court shall write the matter to the office making entry
into and striking off of records and transmission for the purpose of
the execution of the judgment and send that party to that office within
twenty one days.
If so written pursuant to sub-section (1) or the concerned
party appears in the office, such an office shall effect the making of
entry into and striking off of records and transmission in pursuance of
the judgment.
If any party appears in the concerned office to obtain
entry into and striking off of records and transmission after the
expiration of the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (1), the office
shall effect the making of entry into and striking off of records and
transmission in pursuance of the judgment, by collecting the fees of
five hundred rupees for each year.
254. Procedures relating to preemption: (1) If, in the course of making
or allowing preemption in pursuance of a judgment, any party is on
recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall appoint the due
date for such a party to make presence to obtain the preemption of the
property subject to preemption or receive a deposited amount and
send the party to the office where the amount is deposited.
If both parties to obtain and allow preemption make
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the deposited amount to the person obliged to allow preemption
and deliver the deed of that property and receipt thereof to the person
entitled to obtain preemption.
If only the person obliged to allow preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall hand
over the amount to him/her pursuant to sub-section (2) and deliver the
documents including the receipt of payment of the amount to the
person entitled to obtain preemption as and when that person makes
presence subsequently.
If only the person entitled to obtain preemption makes
presence in the office pursuant to sub-section (1), the office shall
effect the preemption in pursuance of the judgment and deliver the
documents including the payment of amount to him/her.
If preemption is effected by the office pursuant to this
Section, the person obliged to allow preemption shall receive the
deposited amount within thirty five days after that date.
If the person obliged to allow preemption shows up to
receive the deposited amount within two years after the expiration of
the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (5), the office shall return
the amount remaining after deduction of three percent of the deposited
amount therefrom to such a person.
If the person obliged to allow preemption does not show
up to receive the deposited amount even within the time-limit as
referred to in sub-section (6), the office shall credit such a deposited
amount to the government fund, as a governmental revenue.
255. Procedures for setting aside partition: (1) If, in the course of setting
aside the partition in pursuance of a judgment, the parties are on
recognizance pursuant to Section 249, the court shall effect partition
by setting aside partition shares within six months.
If a judgment is made to set aside partition to more than
one coparcener and any coparcener is not present, the court shall serve
a fifteen-day summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-28, on the
coparcener failing to make presence.
If the concerned coparcener makes presence within the
time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2), the court shall set aside
partition shares and effect partition in presence of all coparceners.
If all coparceners entitled to receive partition do not
make presence within the time-limit as referred to in sub-section (2),
the court shall set aside partition shares of the coparceners failing to
make presence and effect partition share of the coparceners who make
presence.
If partition is effected pursuant to sub-section (4), the
person failing to make presence within the time-limit shall not be
entitled to file a suit on the matter of making partition or higher or
lower grade or value of the partition share.
If partition is to be effected by sending a commission, the
court shall effect partition by sending an employee.
In the course of setting aside partition shares pursuant to
this Section, the coparceners who are obliged to give partition in
pursuance of the judgment or the coparceners who take custody of the
property set forth in the inventory, their representatives or other major
persons living with them in an undivided family shall produce the
property subject to partition and as set forth in the inventory.
If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property is not found or any major person living in the undivided
family does not produce all properties as set forth in the inventory, the
court shall serve a summons, in the form set forth in Schedule-29 on
the person giving, and taking custody of, the partition share.
If the person giving partition or taking custody of the
property fails to make presence within the time-limit as referred to in
sub-section (8) or does not show the property subject to partition
despite making presence, the court shall effect partition as per the
inventory by opening any property, if any closed, in witness of a
member or representative of the local body and at least two
representatives.
(10) If the parties fail to make presence within the time-limit
as referred to in sub-section (2) or (8), the court shall set aside
partition shares and commence the partition proceedings in pursuance
of the judgment within three days after the expiration of the time-limit.
(11) If any party makes presence in the court after the timelimit given pursuant to sub-section (8) and the partition making is not
complete by that time, the court shall effect partition also in presence
of him/her.
(12) If, in the course of making partition, all properties are not
in order as set forth in the inventory, the amount of the shortfall
property shall be ascertained and shall be reimbursed from the
partition share of the partition giver or the person taking custody of
the property. If the partition share is not recovered even from such a
reimbursement, recovery shall be made from any other property
owned and possessed by such a person to the person receiving
partition, in consideration for such shortfall portion.
(13) If, in the course of effecting partition, the person
receiving partition or a major member living with him/her in an
undivided family refuses to receive his/her partition share and any
perishable property is subject to partition, the court shall auction such
a property. If the concerned person shows up to receive the proceeds
of such auction subsequently, the court shall return the amount
remaining after deducting fifteen percent thereof to him/her.
(14) If the persons receiving partition do not agree as to the
property subject to partition, the court shall divide such a property on
proportionate of higher or lower value or grade and effect partition by
(15) If any person does not show or produce the property in
his/her custody as mentioned in the inventory, the court shall fine that
person with a sum of five percent of the amount in question of the
property not so shown or produced.
(16) In a case where final judgment is passed holding the
plaintiff entitled to partition, if the other defendant coparceners also
make a petition to set aside and receive their respective partition
shares, the court shall collect court fees chargeable by law and set
aside such partition shares from the property as held by judgment and
cause the same to be provided to them.
(17) If the property subject to partition is situated also in
another territory, the court shall write to the concerned court to effect
partition of such property.
(18) If so written pursuant to sub-section (17), the concerned
court shall also effect partition pursuant to this Section and give
information thereof to such a court.
256. Procedures for recovery of amount in question: (1) If, in the course
of recovering amount in question in pursuance of a judgment, the
party entitled to recovery of amount in question is on recognizance
pursuant to Section 249, the court shall cause a deed to be executed by
such a party as to whether that party is willing to have recovery of the
amount in question or not.
If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
party entitled to recovery of the amount in question is not willing to
have recovery of the amount in question, the court shall, on the same
day, terminate the judgment execution proceeding and cross off the
records of amount in question.
If, in executing a deed pursuant to sub-section (1), the
party entitled to recovery of the amount in question desires to have
recovery of the amount in question and the party obliged to pay the
amount in question is on recognizance, the court shall give a time
limit of a maximum of thirty five days to that party to pay the amount
in question as required to be paid in pursuance of the judgment.
The party obliged to pay the amount in question shall
furnish an amount equal to the amount in question with the court in
cash or through a good for payment cheque or any other instrument
within the time given pursuant to sub-section (3).
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
the party entitled to recovery of amount in question may make a
request to the court to have recover of the amount in question from
any property of him/her.
If the party liable to recovery of amount in question is not
present in the court or despite being present refuses to pay the amount
in consideration of the amount in question or fails to show a property
pursuant to sub-section (5), the party entitled to recovery of the
amount in question may, showing the property of the party liable to
pay the amount in question, make a petition to the court to have the
recovery of the amount in question from such a property.
If, in recovering the amount in question pursuant to this
Section, any property has to be attached, the court shall attach such a
property as required and effect the recovery of the amount in question
by also auctioning such a property as required.
If the proceeds of auction sale of the property made
pursuant to sub-section (7) exceed the amount in question, the court
shall immediately return such excess amount to the party liable to pay
the amount in question if he/she is present.
If the concerned party refuses to receive the amount
pursuant to sub-section (8), the court shall credit that amount into the
deposit account.
(10) If the concerned person does not show up to receive the
amount credited into the deposited account within two years after the
date of crediting thereinto, that amount shall be paid to the
government fund, as a governmental revenue.
(11) If the party liable to pay the amount in question is living
or residing in another territory, the court shall write to the concerned
court to effect recovery of the amount in question.
(12) If so written pursuant to sub-section (11), the concerned
court shall also effect recovery of the amount in question pursuant to
this Section and give information thereof to such a court.
(13) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the party liable to recovery of amount in question discovers
the concealment or hiding of any property by the party obliged to pay
the amount in question and makes a petition showing the same while
the party obliged to pay the amount in question is alive, the court shall
auction the property and effect the recovery of amount up to the extent
of the amount in question to which he/she is entitled.
(14) The court shall, in consideration for effecting the
recovery of amount in question pursuant to this Section, collect the
fees of three percent of such amount in question from the party
entitled to recovery of amount in question.
257. Property subject to confiscation: (1) In making confiscation of
entire property pursuant to section 256, also the partition shares of
those who are above twelve years of age and have not separated bread
and board and have lived together and enjoyed such a property or of
those who, despite having obtained their respective partition shares or
separated bread and broad, have lived together while enjoying that
property shall be subject to the confiscation of entire property.
In making confiscation of entire property pursuant to
sub-section (1), the following property shall be set aside:
If any property is in the form of a personal property of a
person other than the person subject to confiscation of
entire property, such a property,
Up to three pairs of clothes and up to three pairs of shoes
to be put on by the person subject to confiscation of
entire property and his/her undivided family members,
Such bare cooking and dining utensils, pots and bare
quilt and mattress as required for the person subject to
confiscation of entire property and his/her undivided
family members,
Such books as required for the undivided family of the
person subject to confiscation of entire property to impart
education,
Such food as required to maintain livelihood of the
person subject to confiscation of entire property and
his/her undivided family members for up to three months
in maximum,
Bare inputs, tool or arms related with the occupation or
employment of the person subject to confiscation of
entire property and his/her undivided family members,
One yoke of oxen for farming.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
setting aside the property pursuant to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and
(g) of that sub-section, no property valued at more than thirty
thousand rupees shall be so set aside.
If the amount in question is not recovered in full even
upon making confiscation of entire property pursuant to sub-section
(2), no claim shall be made against other family members.
258. Imprisonment for amount in question or fine: (1) If the amount in
question is not recovered in full even from the auction sale pursuant to
sub-section (7) of Section 256 and the party entitled to recovery of
amount in question wishes to subject the party liable to pay the
amount in question to imprisonment and makes a petition for the same
within seven days of the auction sale of property, the court shall
execute a memorandum thereof and imprison the party liable to pay
the amount in question in accordance with law.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the court shall convert the remaining amount in question into
imprisonment at the rate of three hundred rupees a day, and imprison
the party liable to pay amount in question equal thereto.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
no person shall be so imprisoned for more than four years in the case
of an amount in question of the Government of Nepal or a public body
which is owned or controlled by the Government of Nepal in full or
majority and for more than two years in the case of an amount in
question of a particular person or other body.
If, in subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section
(1), the amount in question is less than or remains less than three
hundred rupees, the concerned person shall be subjected to
imprisonment for one day for such an amount.
In subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to sub-section (1),
the person wishing to effect such imprisonment shall bear the ration
expenses as chargeable pursuant to law.
In subjecting to imprisonment for a fine, one shall be so
imprisoned at the rate of one hundred rupees a day.
Prior to subjecting to imprisonment pursuant to this
Section, the concerned person shall be given a reasonable time to
present his/her statements.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Chapter, where a person in default of payment of the remaining
amount in question is subjected by order of the court to imprisonment
at the request of the party for the remaining amount in question not
recovered, no claim may be made again on that matter.
259. In the event of death of person liable to pay amount in question:
If the person liable to pay the amount in question dies prior to
the recovery of such amount in question, the amount in question shall
be recovered from the property in which he/she has right.
If the amount in question is not recovered from the
property in which he/she has right, the shortfall amount in question
shall be recovered from the person who inherits his/her property.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), in
recovering the amount in question from the inheritor, no amount in
excess of that inherited by him/her shall be recovered.
260. Concession in fine: If a person who is sentenced to a fine pursuant to
a judgment pays the fine immediately or within sixty days of the date
of passage of judgment, the person shall enjoy twenty percent
concession in the fine imposed on him/her.
261. Execution of deed of compromise: (1) If any deed of compromise is
so executed that any act has to be done or caused to be done by any
government body, the court shall write to the concerned office to do
the act set forth in the deed of compromise, within three days of the
execution of the deed of compromise.
Even though, in a case involving more than one plaintiff
or defendant, all parties are not present for the execution of the deed
of compromise, the deed of compromise shall be executed after the
expiration of the time-limit. In so executing the deed of compromise,
the interest of the person who does not show up for such compromise
shall also be protected.
262. Period to get return of court fees, deposits and expenses: (1)
Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the concerned person
shall get return of such court fees and deposits as held to be retuned
pursuant to judgment within one year after the date of knowledge of
the final judgment.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, the person
entitled to get or return of the proceeds of auction sale shall receive
such amount within three months after the date of auction sale.
If the concerned person does not receive the court fees,
deposits or amounts within the time-limit referred to in sub-section (1)
or (2), the person shall not be entitled to get return of such amount
subsequently.
After the expiration of the time-limit referred to in subsection (2), such deposits shall be credited to the government account.
263. Fees chargeable for the execution of judgment: (1) Except as
otherwise provided for in this Chapter, the court shall collect the fees
at the rate of ten percent from the recipient of any amount the
payment of which has been effected by the court pursuant to a
judgment or any other amount and the fees at the rate of five percent
from the payer of such amount.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
no fees shall be charged for such specification of the deadline for
repayment of a loan, provision of a document or division of property
between or among creditors as effected by the court.
264. Complaint may be made: (1) A concerned person who is not
satisfied with an act or action done or taken by any employee in the
course of execution of a judgment may make a complaint with the
judgment of the same court within fifteen days.
A person who is not satisfied with a decision made on the
complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) may make a petition to the
court hearing appeal.
A complaint made pursuant to sub-section (1) and a
petition made pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be disposed of within
one month and two months, respectively.
265. Proceeding not to be void by the reason only the absence of
representative: (1) If any proceeding has to be carried out in
presence of a member or representative of the local body or to be
signed by him/her pursuant to this Chapter and such a member or
representative does not show up despite serving a written notice for
his/her presence, the proceeding may be carried out or caused to be
carried.
Any proceeding otherwise duly carried out shall not be
void merely by the reason that a member or representative of the local
body was not present or refused to sign pursuant to sub-section (1).
266. Power to institute action or impose punishment on contempt: (1)
It shall be the duty of the parties of a case to assist in the execution of
judgment pursuant to this Chapter.
The court may institute action on contempt of court
against a person who hinders the execution of judgment in accordance
with law or impose punishment of a fine of up to one thousand rupees
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or both on
such a person.
267. Employee entitled to incentive: (1) If a government employee who
is deputed for the recovery of a fine imposed or government amount
in question in pursuance of judgment does not wish to receive the
amount for daily and travel allowance, the employee shall be entitled
to an incentive allowance of thirty percent of the amount recovered.
The bailiff (Tahashildar) shall be entitled to seven
percent of the amount recovered pursuant to sub-section (1).
The allowance or amount as referred to in sub-sections
(1) and (2) shall be chargeable on the amount of fine or government
recovered.
If any person other than a government employee has
recovered the government amount in question or fine pursuant to this
Section, the amount as referred to in sub-section (2) may be provided
that person as if he/she were a government employee.

Chapter-23
Provisions Relating to Civil Cases in which Government of Nepal
is Plaintiff or Party
268. Investigation and filing of civil cases in which Government of
Nepal is plaintiff: (1) A person who intends to institute a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case which is defined as a civil case
by the laws in force shall have to make a petition in writing or
information orally, setting the evidence which is in his/her custody or
which is available to the best of his/her knowledge and information in
relation to such a case to the authority specified by the Government of
Nepal by publishing a notice in the Nepal Gazette or to the concerned
Landreform Officer where such authority has not been so specified.
Where information orally is made pursuant to sub-section
(1), the concerned authority shall set down the matters of that person
in the form of a petition and get him/her to sign that document.
The concerned authority shall, as required, take
measurement and mapping of the house or land related with the case
or make investigation into other necessary matters, and shall, having
regard to the time required to make decision to or not to institute the
case and if decision is made to institute the case, the time required to
frame a plaint and file case, forward the originals of documents in the
case file and one set of duplicate copies thereof, accompanied by the
evidence collected and his/her opinion, to the concerned District
Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute case, in
advance of at least fifteen days of the date of expiration of limitation.
Even though a petition is not made by any person
pursuant to sub-section (1), if the concerned authority himself or
herself sees any reason to institute a case as referred to in sub-section
(1), he/she has to collect necessary evidence, complete the procedures
as referred to in sub-section (3) and forward the case file to the
Government Attorney of the concerned district.
The Government Attorney shall study the case file
received pursuant to sub-section (3) or (4) and decide to or not to
institute the case.
If decision is made to institute the case pursuant to subsection (5), the Government attorney shall frame a plaint and file it,
accompanied by the evidence, in the concerned court.
If decision is made not to institute the case pursuant to
sub-section (5), the Government Attorney shall return the received
case file and evidence to the concerned authority.
269. Case to be instituted as Government of Nepal being plaintiff: The
cases set forth in Schedule-30 shall be instituted as the Government of
Nepal being plaintiff in such cases.
Provided that Section 91 shall apply to the matters in which
plaint has to be filed pursuant to that Section.
270. In the event of revelation that person is to institute case: (1) If, in
studying the case file pursuant to sub-section (5) of Section 268, it is
revealed that the case is not one that is to be instituted as the
Government of Nepal being plaintiff but that is to be instituted upon
making complaint by the aggrieved person himself or herself in
accordance with law, the Government Attorney shall make decision
accordingly and inform the authority who has forwarded the case file
to give a notice indicating that matter to the concerned person.
The limitation as referred to in law shall, in the case of
the concerned person, be counted from the date of receipt of
information pursuant to sub-section (1).
272. Provisions relating to institution of other civil cases: (1) The
authority, if any, specified by the concerned law for the institution of
or collection of evidence on any civil case other than that set forth in
Schedule-30, and the concerned chief of office, where such an
authority has not be specified, shall so submit the case file and
evidence, accompanied by his/her opinion, to the concerned
Government Attorney for decision to or not to institute the case that
the limitation for filing the plaint does not get expired.
Upon receipt of the case file pursuant to sub-section (1),
the Government Attorney shall make decision to or not to institute the
case, and if so decided as to institute the case, shall also mention as to
whom the case is to be instituted against, on which matter and under
which law and send the case file back in a manner that the limitation
for filing the case does not get expired.
If decision is made by the Government Attorney to
institute the case pursuant to sub-section (2), the authority who is
competent by law to that effect shall frame a plaint, sign it and file the
case in the concerned court within the limitation, and a copy of the
case file of such a case has to be provided to the Government
Attorney.
273. Provision relating to limitation: (1) If a lawsuit is to be filed on
behalf of the Government against any person on any civil matter, the
lawsuit has to be filed within the limitation if any specified in this
Code and other laws on that matter, and if no limitation has been so
specified, within two years after the date of knowledge to the
Government of Nepal of the occurrence of the cause of action.
Provided that if this Code or the other law provides that there is
no limitation to file a lawsuit and that a lawsuit may be filed any time,
the lawsuit may be filed any time.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), when the concerned
authority of the Government of Nepal comes to know the matter, the
Government of Nepal shall be deemed to be in knowledge of the
matter.
274. Provisions relating to examination of witness or submission of
evidence: (1) A person who gives information on a case set forth in
Schedule-30 shall be a witness of the plaintiff side.
The concerned authority shall arrange to cause the
presence or submission of a witness or evidence, on a case set forth in
Schedule-30 and any other civil case in which the Government of
Nepal is concerned, through the Government Attorney on the day as
appointed by the court.
The Government Attorney shall cause the examination of
witnesses and submission of evidence on a case set forth in Schedule30 and any other civil case in which the Government of Nepal is
concerned.
If any witness must be examined on a case set forth in
Schedule-2, the witness may be summoned and examined as if he/she
were a witness that must be summoned and examined on a criminal
case.
275. Government Attorney to make pleadings and defense: (1) The
Government Attorney shall make pleadings and defense on a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and a civil case that is defined by any law as to
be a state case.
If, except as mentioned in sub-section (1), it is so
requested by the concerned body in relation to a case in which the
Government of Nepal is made an opposite party or a civil case which
has been instituted as the Government of Nepal being a plaintiff, the
Government Attorney may make pleadings and defense.
276. Time limit to be given: (1) The court shall give a time-limit of
seventy days for making an appeal on a case set forth in Schedule-30.
If the concerned party expires the time limit pursuant to
sub-section (1) and makes an application showing a reasonable reason
to the court, the court may extend the time limit of up to thirty days in
relation the time limit that is extendable pursuant to Chapter-8.
277. Authority to make appeal, revision or review petition: (1) If it is
required to make an appeal, revision or review petition on a case set
forth in Schedule-30 and on a civil case which is defined by any law
as the Government of Nepal being plaintiff, the concerned
Government Attorney shall make such an appeal or petition.
If, except that set forth in sub-section (1), it is required to
make an appeal, revision or review petition or other relevant petition
on a civil case in which the Government of Nepal is a party or
opposite party, the concerned authority or chief of office himself or
herself shall make such an appeal or petition.
Provided that if the concerned authority or chief of office so
writes, the concerned Government Attorney may make an appeal,
revision or review petition or other relevant petition.
278. Procedures for filing lawsuit against the Government of Nepal:
(1) If it is required to make a lawsuit against the Government of Nepal
on a civil case, the concerned person shall give a notice thereof to that
office or the chief of that office against which the lawsuit has to be
made.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned office or chief of that office shall have to obtain
consultation or clearance of another office or body wherever so
required.
If a notice is received pursuant to sub-section (1) and
there is any reason why the lawsuit should not have been made on that
matter, the concerned office or chief of that office shall give
information thereof, along with clear reason for the same, to the
concerned person within thirty days after the date of receipt of
information pursuant to that sub-section.
If no information is given within the period as referred to
in sub-section (1) or the said reason why the lawsuit should not have
been made is not reasonable, the concerned person may file a lawsuit
within thirty five days after the date of receipt of such information.
279. Application of Code and law on other matters: This Chapter shall
apply to the matters set forth in this Chapter, and the other Chapters
and law shall apply to the other matters not set forth in this Chapter, in
relation to civil cases in which the Government of Nepal is plaintiff or
party.

Chapter-24
Miscellaneous
280. Compensation to be determined: (1) If, on a case in which
compensation may be obtained pursuant to law for any loss or damage
caused to a person by the violation of right or interest of that person,
that person makes a claim for compensation, the court shall, in
deciding the case, determine the compensation.
In determining the compensation pursuant to sub-section
(1), the following matters may be taken into consideration except as
otherwise provided by law for the determination of compensation:
Actual loss or damage caused from the violation,
Loss in income caused from the violation,
Additional loss resulted from the violation.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, in determining the compensation, compensation shall be
determined only on the basis of the actual loss resulted from the
violation of the right or interest of any person and the actual loss
resulted or likely to result from that cause, and compensation may not
be determined on remote matters.
281. Guardian may file case with the leave of court: (1) In making or
submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or
petition on behalf of a minor who has not attained the age as referred
to in law, an infirm person due to old age despite attaining the age, a
person who is blind or dumb or a person who is insane, the guardian
of such a person may, with the leave of the court upon a separate
petition, along with the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
appeal or petition, make or submit the plaint, statement of defense,
memorandum of appeal or petition.
There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
person is a minor, a person is inform due to old age despite attaining
the age, is a blind, dumb or insane or not, pursuant to sub-section (1),
and if so proved, the guardian may make or submit a plaint, statement
of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.
If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
petition on the same day as on which the petition is made for leave.
282. Institution of case on behalf of disappeared person: (1) In making
or submitting a plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal
or petition on behalf of a disappeared person, the heir to such a person
may, with the leave of the court upon a separate petition, along with
the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of appeal or petition,
make or submit the plaint, statement of defense, memorandum of
appeal or petition.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the expression
"disappeared person" means a person who has left the house without
information since consecutive three years ago or who has gone abroad
but it is uncertain that he/she will return to Nepal.
There shall be examined evidence first as to whether a
person is a disappeared person or not, pursuant to sub-section (1), and
if so proved, the heir may make or submit a plaint, statement of
defense, memorandum of appeal or petition on behalf of that person
despite failing a power of attorney or authorization.
If a petition is made for a leave pursuant to sub-section
(1), the court shall examine the petition and make decision on the
petition within fifteen days after the making of petition for leave.
The provision of limitation shall not apply in the case as
referred to in sub-section (3).
283. Undertaking to accept case: (1) Where a case is being proceeded
with any court upon a plaint or memorandum of appeal being filed by
person, and any party of the case dies or becomes of unsound of mind
or disappears prior to the judgment on that case and consequently the
time-limit and due date appointed by the court gets expired, the heir to
that party may make a petition to the court, undertaking to accept the
case, for the extension of the time-limit and due date, within twenty
one days from the date of his/her death, being of unsound mind or
disappearance, excluding the time required for journey.
If, upon examining a petition made pursuant to subsection (1), the contents seem to be reasonable, the court may order to
allow to undertake to accept the case and to extend the expired timelimit or due date.
284. Hearing of cases to be conducted in open bench: (1) The court shall
conduct hearing of cases in open bench.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if
any party of the case makes a petition setting out the reasons for
conducting in camera the hearing of a case of family relation,
establishment of relation and divorce, and the request of petition
seems to be reasonable or if the court itself deems that it is appropriate
to conduct in camera the hearing of any case, the court shall make an
order to conduct in camera the hearing of the case.
Where an order is made to conduct in camera the hearing
of a case pursuant to sub-section (2), the court shall prohibit the
access of any person other than the parties of that case or their
attorneys, law practitioners appointed by the parties or such other
persons or employees as the judge considers necessary.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Section, if the court considers it reasonable to prevent the access of
any person for the public security reason, the court may prohibit the
access of such person to the bench.
285. Requirement to make proceeding in presence of parties: In
conducting hearing of cases pursuant to Section 271 or deciding issues
to be settled, such proceeding shall be conducted in presence of the
parties.
Provided that even if any party is not present on the due date
appointed for the hearing of a case, nothing shall be deemed to bar the
deciding, and reaching the verdict on, the case.
286. Priority order of trying cases: (1) The court shall proceed, hear and
settle cases as per the following order of priority:
A case in which a disabled or a minor is a party,
A case in which a physically infirm person or aged
having attained more than seventy five years of age is a
party,
A case relating to name-giving function or settlement of
relationship,
A case relating to alimony,
A case relating to divorce,
A case registered earlier according to the order of
registration of cases.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
if there are cases of more than one nature in the same order, the case
registered earlier shall be proceeded, heard and adjudicated first.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1),
and (2), the court may, in view of the gravity and propriety of any
case, proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case by according priority to
287. Judge not to try case involving conflict of interest: (1) No
judge
shall, in proceeding, hearing and adjudicating cases pursuant to this
Code, proceed, hear and adjudicate the following case:
A case to or in which his/her right, interest or concern or
that of his/her close relative is involved,
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term
“close relative” means a person who is in the order of
priority to inherit his/her property upon succession, in
accordance with law, maternal uncle, maternal aunt,
mother's elder sister, mother's younger sister, father's
elder brother, father's younger brother, mother-in-law,
father-in-law on the side of husband or wife, father’s
sister, father’s sister's husband, elder brother-in-law,
younger
brother-in-law,
sister-in-law,
elder
sister,
younger sister, daughter, son-in-law, nephew, niece's
husband, or any person residing in an undivided family
of such relative person.
A case in which he/she was an attorney, law practitioner
or witness at any time,
A case which was decided by himself or herself as the
judge in any court or in which he/she made final order,
A case in which he/she has given an opinion on whether
to institute it or not at any time,
A case in which he/she or his/her undivided family
member has a conflict of interest substantially for any
other reason.
If there appears any circumstance as referred to in subsection (1), the case hearing judge shall make an order setting out the
reason for not hearing it.
If any judge proceeds to try, hear or settle any case in
breach of sub-section (1), any party may make a petition,
accompanied by necessary evidence, for not so proceeding, hearing or
adjudicating the case.
If a petition is received pursuant to sub-section (3), the
case trying judge shall, before proceeding, hearing or adjudicating the
case, ascertain whether the request or claim of such a petition is
reasonable or not, and make an order to that effect if the judge should
not hear the case.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (2) or (4),
such case shall be proceeded, heard or adjudicated by another judge in
the same court, and failing such a judge, the case-file, accompanied by
the reasons therefor, shall be sent to the nearby court of same level to
proceed, hear and adjudicate the case, and due date shall also be
appointed for the parties to make presence in that court.
If the case-file is received pursuant to sub-section (5),
such a court shall also proceed, hear and adjudicate such a case
despite that it is not within its jurisdiction.
288. Acts to be carried out by judge himself or herself: (1) The
following acts, out of the acts to be carried out by the court pursuant
to this Code, shall be carried out by the judge himself or herself:
To take and record depositions of parties,
To take an oath of witness,
To take and record depositions of witnesses,
To make interim or interlocutory orders,
To execute order sheets on matters to be decided in the
case,
To issue order for the examination of evidence,
Preliminary hearing and pre-hearing discussions of cases,
To make hearings,
To effect compromise,
To pass judgments or issue any kind of final order.
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a
judge may take assistance of an employee in the court whose rank is
at least non-gazette first class, as far as available in the court, for the
purposes of taking or record statements or depositions.
289. Translation of document: (1) If any document written in any
language other than the Nepali language is submitted to the court in
the form of evidence, and it appears necessary to translate such a
document in the Nepali language, the court may order the party who
has submitted such a document to submit a translation of the
document in the Nepali language.
If an order is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the
concerned party shall get the document translated in the Nepali
language and submit a certified copy thereof to the court.
290. Assistance of translator: (1) If it is required to take a statement or
deposition of any party or witness who is unable to understand the
Nepali language, or for any other purpose, the court may appoint take
assistance of a translator of the concerned language.
The concerned party shall bear the expenses incurred in
taking assistance of the translator for statement or deposition pursuant
to sub-section (1).
291. Power to ask parties of case at any time: (1) The judge may, prior
to passing a judgment on a case, order and ask any matter to the
parties of the case at any time.
The responses given pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be
recorded in the case-file.
292. Identity of party or witness may be kept secret: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Code, if it
appears that the disclosure of the identity of any party or witness may
be prejudicial to the social prestige or honor of such a party or witness
or may result in undue fear, terror or fright by any party or be
prejudicial to the security of his/her body or life, the concerned party
may request the court that the name, surname, address of such a party
or witness or the name of his/her father or any other description which
may disclose his/her identity be kept secret.
If a request is made pursuant to sub-section (1), the court
may issue an order that the name, surname and address of such a party
or witness and his/her father's name or his/her identity be kept secret.
In disclosing the name, surname, address of the person
or his/her father's name having been kept secret pursuant to subsection (1) at the time of hearing of the concerned case or publishing
details pertaining thereto, such disclosure shall be made under nick
name, surname, address or father's name, as per the order of the court.
293. Duty to assist in witnessing or signing: (1) Any person required to
witness an action or sign a document prepared by the court in the
course of any proceeding pursuant to this Code shall assist the court
by so witnessing the action or signing the document.
If any person refuses to witness a action or sign a
document as referred to in sub-section (1), the employee executing
that action or document shall execute such document which shall be
signed by any other two persons present and by himself or herself,
setting out that matter and remarks, along with the reason for the
failure of such a person to witness or sign the concerned document.
Any document executed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall
be deemed to have been executed in fulfillment of the requirements
specified by law.
If any person required to sign any document executed
before the court refuses to sign it, the judge shall set out the matter,
mention remarks in the concerned document and sign it.
The concerned court may fine a person who causes
obstruction to or does not cooperate in the action of the court pursuant
to this Section with a maximum of five thousand rupees.
294. Saving of act done in good faith: No judge or other employee shall
be subject to any action in relation to any act or action done or taken
in good faith in accordance with this Code or the rules framed under
this Code.
295. Not to be invalid by reason of printing or mathematical error: (1)
Where there is any minor error or omission in respect of the
procedures referred to in this Code while trying, hearing and settling a
case, or mathematical or any other minor error or omission in writing
or printing while preparing any document, all acts and proceedings
relating thereto shall not be deemed invalid merely by that reason.
Where there is any mathematical or any other minor error
or omission in writing or printing while trying, hearing and settling a
case or while preparing any document pursuant to sub-section (1), the
judgment may, by executing a separate memorandum, so correct such
an error or omission that such correction does not affect the verdict.
296. Receipt to be taken or given: (1) While returning any original
document registered in the court to any person or handing over any
original document by the court to any person, a receipt or proof to the
effect the such document has been so returned or handed over shall be
executed or taken and enclosed in the case file.
While receiving any document submitted by any person
to the court, it shall give a receipt of the same to that person.
297. Petition fee: Except as otherwise provided for in this Code, there
shall be charged a fee of ten rupees while making any petition to the
court.
298. Index of documents: There shall be maintained an index of
documents in each case in the format specified in Schedule-30, and
such index shall record the serial number and details of the documents,
according to the order of the date of registration.
299. Disposal of documents: (1) After the completion of five years of the
final decision on a case, the court shall dispose the documents, except
the following documents enclosed in the case file of the said case:
Plaint,
Affidavit,
Statement of defense or counter claim,
Summons issued in the name of party,
Map or design related with the case,
Originals of documentary evidence,
Deed of compromise,
Memorandum of appeal,
Petition made for revision or review of verdict,
Judgment, decision, final decision made by the court,
Any such other documents as considered necessary to be
preserved in accordance with law.
The employee responsible for documents (Shrestedar)
shall, prior to the disposal of documents pursuant to sub-section (1)
prepare an inventory of the documents to be disposed and sign the
inventory.
300. Power to make alteration in Schedules: The Government of Nepal
may, by publishing a notification in the Nepal Gazette, make
necessary alteration in, or addition to, or deletion from, the Schedules.
301. Power to frame rules: The Supreme Court may frame necessary
rules on matters of court proceedings, for the accomplishment of the
objectives of this Code.
302. Power to remove difficulty: If there arises any difficulty in relation
to court proceedings in implementing this Code, the full court of the
Supreme Court may make necessary provision in order to remove
such a difficulty.
303. Power to frame guidelines: The Supreme Court may, subject to this
Code and the rules framed under this Code, frame necessary
guidelines for the accomplishment of the objectives of this Code.
Schedule-1
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 95)
Format of Plaint
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Plaint
lodged in………..Court/Office
Civil diary number of the year……………
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
case of each Plaintiff)
Versus
………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
case of each Defendant)
Case:
I/we Plaintiff make plaint as mentioned in the following paragraphs:
This case is within the jurisdiction of this Court/Office pursuant to
Section… of ……….
In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Evidence:
I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
in this matter:
Witness:
…….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Pliant lodged by:
………………
Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..
Schedule-2
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98)
Format of Diary Book
…………..Court/Office
Civil Diary Book from the month of Shrwan of the year…..to the last day of
the month of Ashad of the year…….
Case number
Date of registration
Plaintiff's signature
Plaintiff's name, surname and
address
Defendant's
name,
surname
address
Name and signature of section chief
Figure of amount in question
Date on which statement of defense
submitted or time limit has expired
Date of judgment and name of judge
passing judgment
Type of judgment
Signature of employee receiving record
case file
Remarks
Schedule-3
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 98, sub-section (1) of Section 122,
and sub-section (2) of Section 124)
Receipt
…………..Court/Office
Whereas,
plaint/
statement
defense/
memorandum
appeal
lodged/submitted by…………….., has been received by this Court/Office
and registered in the Diary Book of this Court/Office, with registration
number….on ………(date);
Now, therefore, this receipt is hereby given.
Employee registering plaint/statement of defense/memorandum of appeal:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Seal of Court/Office
Schedule-4
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 99)
Receipt of Acknowledgement of Plaint along with the summons
Whereas, …………………. has lodged the Plaint in …………Court/Office
on……….(date), and has been tendered by him/her to me for the purpose of
submitting a statement of defense;
Now, therefore, I have acknowledged the receipt of the copies of the Plaint
and evidence, along with the summons.
Person acknowledging receipt of Plaint along with the summons:
Signature:
Name:
Date:
Time:
Schedule-5
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 104 and Section 114)
Summons Issued by …….Office/Office
in the Name of Defendant
Whereas, Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/ daughter/ husband/
wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, has lodged a Plaint of
………..case against you Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of ………… Gown,
Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, in this Office/Court on …..date;
Now, therefore, a copy of the Plaint is also hereby herewith forwarded. You
are hereby informed to appear in person or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, accompanied by a Statement of Defense
and your documentary evidence in accordance with law within twenty one
days excluding the time limit required for journey after the date of receipt of
this summons by you or the date of affixation of this summons at your house
according to law.
If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner,
accompanied by the Statement of Defense within the time-limit, the case
shall be adjudicated according to law, and any of your complaints on this
matte shall not be entertained in the future.
Summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Time:
Date of service:
In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
receive:
I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
family of the person required to receive:
As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
required to receive:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a
copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has
delivered
Office
…….VDC/Municipality.
In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
required to receive it is not found:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….
Witnesses
We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
In presence:
Mr./Mrs.
…………….,
member/secretary………..
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District
In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
found
Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board
Office
………….VDC/Municipality:
(Employee or office-bearer)
Process server:
Process server's name, surname:
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-6
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 104)
Summons Issued by …….Office/Office
in the Name of Person Except Defendant
Whereas, it is necessary to inquire you, Mr./Ms………….., age of …….
years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District, into
some matters in connection with the case of ………, between the
plaintiff……… and the defendant………..;
Now, therefore, you are hereby informed to appear in person in this
Office/Court or send an attorney or law practitioner appointed in accordance
with law within seven days excluding the time limit required for journey
after the date of receipt of this summons by you or the date of affixation of
this summons at your house according to law.
If you fail to appear in person or through an attorney or law practitioner
within the time-limit, the case shall be adjudicated according to law, and any
of your complaints on this matter shall not be entertained in the future.
Summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Time:
Date of service:
In cases where the summons is received by the person required to
receive:
I hereby sign covenanting that I have myself received a copy of the
summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint, issued in my name as
mentioned herein in presence of the following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is received by a member of the joint
family of the person required to receive:
As the person named in the summons as mentioned herein has refused
to receive the summons/ has not been found, I………, age
of………year, who is………..by relation of ………………..the
person who is named in the summons, hereby sign covenanting that I
have received a copy of the summons, as well as a copy of the Plaint,
issued in his/her name as mentioned herein, in presence of the
following witnesses: …………
In cases where the summons is affixed at the house of the person
required to receive:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
named in the summons as mentioned herein as well as any major
member of his/her joint family has refused to receive the
summons/has not been found, a copy of the summons, as well as a
copy of the Plaint, issued in his/her name, has been affixed at his/her
house in a manner conspicuously to all in presence of us, the
following witnesses, and it is true that a copy of the summons has
delivered
Office
…….VDC/Municipality.
In cases where the summons is to be served when the person
required to receive it is not found:
We, the following persons, hereby sign covenanting that as the person
required to receive the summons as mentioned herein or his/her house
as well has been searched but not found, a copy of the summons
issued in his/her name has been affixed at….. of the concerned Ward
or at public place…… (set out the place) of street…., and the copy of
the Plaint and the served summons have been sent back….
Witnesses
We hereby sign covenanting that it is true that the summons has been
served in our presence in accordance with the above-mentioned clause.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, a resident of …………
village,
No…..,
………VDC/Municipality,
……….District.
In presence:
Mr./Mrs.
…………….,
member/secretary………..
…………VDC/Municipality,……………. District
In cases where affixed at house or village city or street is not
found
Employee or office-bearer who signs covenanting that one copy of the
summons as mentioned herein has been tendered for affixing at the
notice-board
Office
………….VDC/Municipality:
(Employee or office-bearer)
Process server:
Process server's name, surname:
Signature:
Date:
Schedule-7
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 113)
Receipt Given by Attorney or Law Practitioner upon Receiving Plaint
Accompanied by the Summons/Summons
I have received the Plaint accompanied by the summons and a copy of
evidence/summons tendered by Mr./Ms………………, who has lodged the
Plaint in this Office/Court on……..(date), for the purpose of submitting a
State of Defense.
Attorney
practitioner
receiving
plaint
accompanied by the summons/summons:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Address:
Date:
Time:
Certificate number of attorney/law practitioner:
Schedule-8
(Relating to Section 120)
Format of Statement of Defense
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Statement of Defense Submitted to
………..Court/Office
Civil diary number of the year……………
Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants, mention the same details in the
case of each Defendant)
Versus
………….., age of ……. years, son/daughter/husband/wife of
……………., a resident of ………….
-Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs, mention the same details in the
case of each Plaintiff)
Case:
Whereas, in the above-mentioned case, the summons accompanied by the
Plaint has been served on…….. (date);
I/we have appeared along with the Statement of Defense within the timelimit, in relation to the matters claimed by the Pliant in various paragraphs of
his/her Plaint.
I/we have set out the following paragraphs my/our true statements in
relation to the matters claimed by the Plaintiff:
I/we admit the claims of Plaint fully or partly/do not admit the same at
Mention counter claims if any:
In the case of appointment of law practitioner, details thereof:
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
Name………..
Certificate number……….
I/we have tendered the following fees for payment herewith:
Rs………. for…………
Rs………. for…………
Evidence:
I/we have attached the copies of the following evidentiary documents
in this matter:
Witness:
…….(Mention full names, ages, and addresses of witnesses)
For such and such reasons, this matter is or is not liable to preliminary
hearing pursuant to Section 131 of the Civil Procedure Code, 2067
(2011).
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Statement of Defense submitted by:
………………
Done on ….day of the month of…..of the year……..
Schedule-9
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)
Format of Book of Due Date
Book of Due Date maintained in………Court/Office
Year:………………..
Month,
appellant/
plaintiff/petitioner
respondent/
plaintiff
Purpose of
appointment
of due date
Remarks
Signature:
Schedule-9
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 137)
Format of Memorandum of Due Date
Memorandum of due date issued by...............in the name of................
…………………Versus.....................
Whereas, the date of ........, has been appointed as the due date for presence
for the purpose of ................, in the case of……………, civil diary number
………….. of the year…….;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to make presence at........o'clock on
the said day.
Signature of employee appointing due date:
Date:
Schedule-11
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 138)
Format of Receipt of Due Date
Receipt of Due Date Maintained in……..Office/Court
Plaintiff
Defendant
Case:
On……….(date)
Whereas, the case is scheduled to be heard finally for judgment or
…………..business is to be conducted on………..(date);
Now, therefore, I hereby sign covenanting that I shall make presence
at........o'clock on the said day.
Plaintiff:
Defendant:
Schedule-12
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 151)
Format of Power of Attorney
have,
power
attorney,
appointed
authorized
Mr./Ms.......................,
……years,
holding
citizenship
number…..( year and district of issue of citizenship certificate), a resident of
……………., as my attorney to carry out the act of..................... (set out the
purpose) on my behalf, in the case of.......... with................ He/she does not
suffer any disqualification for being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government amount in question or other
fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to law is not due and payable
by me. The contents mentioned above are true and correct. I consent that this
power of attorney may be annulled pursuant to law if the contents mentioned
above are proved to be false.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
I hereby consent to act as an attorney of Mr./Ms..............., age of …… years,
holding citizenship number….. (year and district of issue of citizenship
certificate), a resident of..............., as mentioned above. I shall perform the
said act with honesty. Any such penalty, fine, court fees, government
amount in question or other fees as imposed on me by the court pursuant to
law is not due and payable by me. I do not suffer any disqualification for
being an attorney, in accordance with law.
Date:
Thumb impressions
Signature:
Right
...........(Full name)
...........(Full address)
Witnesses:
It is true and correct that this power of attorney has been drawn up and
signed in our presence.
………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................
………………………….age of ......years, a resident of..................
Writer:…………
This Power of Attorney has been drawn up at………….
Date:
Schedule-13
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 185)
Format of Summons Issued in the Name of Witness
Summons issued by............ Office/Court in the name of................a resident
of............
Whereas, you have been mentioned as a witness by …………….. in the case
of..........., in which..................is plaintiff and ..............is defendant, and it is
required to inquire you into some matters and take your deposition;
Now, therefore, you are hereby required to appear in this Office/Court
at.......o'clock in the morning on the------day of the month of..........the
year........ If you fail to appear, it shall be in accordance with the laws.
Signature of summons issuing authority:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
(Seal of the Office/Court)
Schedule-14
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 186)
Format of Deed of Records of Examination of Witness through Video
Conferencing
It is true and correct that since Mr./Ms.…………., a resident of………, who
is a witness of the plaintiff/defendant, in the case…………….., in which
……..is plaintiff and ………….defendant , could not appear in the court,
that witness has been examined through video conferencing by an order
dated……….. The witness was examined in presence of us, the following
persons.
Name, surname of the witness:
Signature of employee deputed by the court:
Name, surname and post of employee deputed by the court:
Signature of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law practitioner:
Name and surname of plaintiff, defendant or their attorney or law
practitioner:
Signature of member or representative of local body:
Name, surname and post of member or representative of local body:
Schedule-15
(Relating to Section 189)
Form of Oath To be Taken by Witness
I............hereby take an oath in the name of the God/ swear with truth and
honesty that in the case of...............versus............, I shall give true statement
of whatever I have seen, known and heard; that I shall not conceal or lie any
matter; and that I shall give true answers to all questions asked by the
Office/Court and by or on behalf of the parties to the case, to the extent of
whatever I have seen, known and heard. If the matters are proved false, I
shall be liable to the consequences as per law.
Signature of oath taking person:
Date:
It is true and correct that the witness has taken oath in my presence.
(Signature of the judge)
Date:
Schedule-16
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 192)
Format of Taking Deposition of Witness
Case................
Civil Diary Number............of the year.........
………………………..Versus.....................
Deposition of witness...................
Questions and answers of the questions
Question (to be asked by the court): What is your and your father's,
mother's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Question (to be asked by the concerned party/his/her law practitioner):
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
(Note: If the concerned party or law practitioner does not ask any
question, the court shall ask necessary questions)
If the opposite party/law practitioner has made crossexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
If the concerned party party/law practitioner desires to make reexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
If the court desires to ask any question, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
It is true and correct that this deposition records what I have
stated.
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition:
Signature of the person/judge taking deposition:
Date:
Schedule-17
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 194)
Form of Commission/Letter of Rogetory
A commission/letter rogetory sent by...............
Case number .............
Of the year.....
……………………………………..Plaintiff
Versus
……………………………………..Defendant
Deposition of witness...............
Question: What is your and your father's name?
Answer:
What is your age? What is your occupation? Where do you live?
Answer:
Questions asked and sent by the court:
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……….
Question:
Answer:……..
If the opposite party/law practitioner has appeared and made crossexamination, details thereof:…..
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
Answer:……….
It is true and correct that this deposition by commission records what I
have stated.
Signature of the party:
Signature of the person making deposition by commission:
Signature of the person or judge taking deposition by commission:
Date:
Schedule-18
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 203)
...........Court
Form of Judgment
…….District Court/Office
Bench
Judgment passed by…….
Civil Diary Number...............of the year....................
Case:
Name, surname and address of the
Plaintiff
(If there are two or more Plaintiffs,
mention the same details in the case
of each Plaintiff)
Name, surname and address of the
Defendant
(If there are two or more Defendants,
mention the same details in the case
of each Defendant)
Plaintiff's witness……..
Defendant's witness……..
Evidence:
Evidence:
Examined by the court:
Witness:…………..
Evidence:…………
………….
Brief facts of the case:
Matters to be decided by the court:
Verdict of the court, accompanied by the reasons:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: On the basis of the plaint lodged, statement of defense submitted in
rebuttal of the plaint, counterclaims, evidences furnished by the plaintiff or
the defendant in the concerned case, and the relevant laws, the judge shall
have to set down his/her verdict specifying the reasons why the claims of the
plaint or counterclaims sustain or not.)
Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
Matter relating to court fees:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
along with the date
Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..
Schedule-19
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 205)
Format of Notice of Appeal Time Limit along with Judgment/ Notice of
Judgment
The notice of appeal time limit along with judgment/notice of judgment
issued by ……………Court/Office in the name of ………………, a resident
of……………………………….
Whereas, in the case of…………, in which …………..is plaintiff and
…………….is defendant, judgment has been passed by this Court/Office
on……………., sustaining the plaintiff claim/dismissing the plaintiff
claim/withholding the plaintiff claim;
Now, therefore, if you are not satisfied with the judgment, you are hereby
informed to make an appeal in the Appellate Court within…..days from the
date of receipt of this time-limit or of the affixation of the notice of timelimit at your house. If you fail to make an appeal within the time limit and
expire the time limit, the case shall be dealt with in accordance with law.
Any of your subsequent claims shall not be entertained. This notice is hereby
sent for your information.
Signature of authority issuing the notice of appeal time limit/judgment:
Signature:
Name:
Post:
Date:
Schedule-20
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 213)
Format of Memorandum of Appeal
To be filled by Court/Office
Registration number:
Date of registration:
Memorandum of Appeal
filed in………..Court/Office
………………, a resident of……… Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the
case of each Appellant)
Versus
………………, a resident of……… Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the
case of each Respondent)
Case:
The judge and Court/Office passing judgment:
Date of judgment:
Case file number of judgment:
Whereas, I/ we am/are not satisfied with the judgment passed by the said
judge and the court/office in the above-mentioned case in which I/ we
am/are party, thereby holding the following matters in relation to the
following matters, and I/ we have got the notice of the judgment
on….(mention the date);
Now, therefore, I/ we hereby make the following appeal, pursuant to
Section…..of the Civil Code, 2067 (2010).
Short description of the case:
Grounds on which the judgment is based:
Reasons for making appeal and matters of rebuttal of the grounds on
which the judgment is based:
Appeal pleas:
Court fees and other fees chargeable in making appeal:
Other necessary matters, if any:
The matters contained herein are true and correct. If they are proved
false, I shall be liable to consequences in accordance with law.
Appellant's signature:
Date:
Schedule-21
(Relating to sub-section (1) of Section 219)
Format of Notice Issued to Summon the Presence of Respondent
…….Office/Office
……………………………………
Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
Versus
…………………………..………
Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
Notice issued in the name of Mr./Ms………….., age of ……. years, son/
daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident of …………
village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, an order (mention the short description of the order) was issued by
this Court on……….(date);
Now, therefore, this notice, accompanied by a copy of the order, is hereby
sent to you for your information. You are hereby informed to appear in
person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with law,
accompanied by your documentary evidence in that case. Otherwise, the
matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law. The case may be
matured for decision after fifteen days of the service of this notice.
On this…………..day, ….of the month of ………of the year………, this
notice is issued under the seal of the court and with my signature.
(Seal of court)
As ordered,
Signature
Schedule-22
(Relating to sub-section (4) of Section 220)
Form of Appellate Judgment
...........Court
(Single/Division Bench)
Judgment passed by Honorable Judge…….
Civil Appeal Number...............of the year....................
Case:……..
Full name, surname and address of the Appellant
Appellant/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Appellants, mention the same details in the case of
each Appellant)
Full name, surname and address of the Respondent
Respondent/Plaintiff/Defendant
(If there are two or more Respondents, mention the same details in the case
of each Respondent)
Brief facts of the case:
(Mention brief facts of the case and matters in which appeal has been
made)
Mention short description of the order made by the Appellate Court to
summon the presence of the Respondent:
Mention short description of the evidence, if any, examined:
Appeal claims and matters to be decided by the Appellate Court
(mention in points)
Decision and verdict of the Court, accompanied by the reasons and
grounds:
Subsequent section:
Matter relating to the execution of judgment:
Matter relating to time-limit for appeal:
Matter relating to court fees:
Other necessary matters:
(Note: In the matters to be mentioned in the subsequent part of the
judgment, the judgment passing judge shall mention how the
judgment is executed, whether it is appealable or not and if appealable,
in which court it is appealable, whether court fees, charges are to be
recovered or not, and if so recovered, how they are to be recovered
and other necessary matters depending on the nature of the case).
The judge has to put his/her full signature here,
along with the date
Name of the employee assisting in the preparation of the judgment:
Done on ……, the……day of the month of…………..of the year……..
Schedule-23
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 228)
Format of Request for the Service of Judicial Document
Name and address of the foreign court making order to serve the
judicial document in Nepal:
Description of the case:
Description of the judicial document to be served:
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
the person on whom the judicial has to be served:
Description of which procedure or mode has to be adopted for the
service of the judicial document:
Description of the body making request for the service of the judicial
document:
Concerned authority:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Office:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-24
(Relating to sub-section (7) of Section 229)
Format of Description of the Service of Judicial Document
The undersigned has certified that the following judicial document has been
served as follows or that it has not been served:
Country making request for the service of the judicial document and
authority of such a country:
Description of the judicial document served:
Date of receipt of the judicial document to be served:
Case:
The name, surname and address of the person on whom the judicial to
be served or has been served:
Description of whom the judicial document has been delivered to and
served:
Full name:
Address:
His/her relation with the person whom the judicial document to
be served or has been served:
Where the service has been executed in any manner other than that set
forth in paragraph 6, description thereof:
Whether service has been executed in accordance with the laws of
Nepal or in accordance with separate mode pursuant to the request of
the concerned country:
In the event of failure to execute the service, description thereof:
In the event of failure to execute the service, description of the return
of the judicial document:
Certifying authority:
Name, surname:
Office:
Signature:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-25
(Relating to sub-section (3) of Section 230)
Format of Details of Evidence To Be Examined Abroad
Name and address of the court/office making order to examine the
evidence abroad:
Description of the case:
Date of filing of case:
Plaintiff……………
Defendant…………
Description of the evidence to be taken:
The name, surname, address of, and other necessary details to identify,
the person from whom evidence has to be taken:
Procedures and manner of examination of the evidence:
Description of the body making request for the taking of evidence:
Concerned authority:
Signature:
Name, surname:
Office:
Date:
The description of this Schedule is a general format, and it can be used with
necessary alterations.
Schedule-26
(Relating to sub-section (5) of Section 249)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Presence of Party For the
Purpose of Execution of Judgment
Twenty-one Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name
of Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a
resident of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.
Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been
adjudicated) was passed by the………… Court on……….(date), in the case
of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is defendant;
Now, therefore, this summons has been issued to summon your presence for
the purpose of execution of the judgment. You are hereby informed to
appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in accordance with
law, within twenty one days, excluding the time limit required for journey,
after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of affixation of the
summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. The matter shall be
proceeded with in accordance with law if you do not make presence within
the time limit.
(Signature)
(Full name, surname)
Bailiff
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-27
(Relating to sub-section (9) of Section 252)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Person to Open the Lock of
House/Shop to be Foreclosed
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of ……………., a resident
of ………… village/street, Ward No….., ………VDC/Municipality,
………….District.
Whereas, final judgment (mention short details what has been adjudicated)
was passed by the………… Court on……….(date) to make foreclosure, in
the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and ………………is
defendant, and whereas, a mission was sent by his Court to make foreclosure,
by the mission found that the house/shop, built in plot number….., situated
at Ward No….., ………..VDC/Municipality,…………District, was locked
up and you, who are the owner of that house/shop did not appear to open
that lock;
Now, therefore, this fifteen-day summons has been affixed at the house/shop
to be foreclosed, hereby requiring you to open the lock of that house/shop.
You are hereby required to open the lock of that house/shop within fifteen
days after the affixation of this summons. If you do not open the lock within
that time limit, the mission sent by the court shall effect the foreclosure of
the house or shop by breaking the lock. Any complaint by you in this regard
shall not be entertained in the future.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-28
(Relating to sub-section (2) of Section 255)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Does not
Appear For Setting Aside Partition Share
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, the other coparceners appeared in
the Court for the setting aside of partition shares in accordance with law in
pursuance of the judgment but you were absent;
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby issued requiring you to make
presence to receive your share in partition in accordance with law. You are
hereby required to appear in person or send an attorney or law practitioner in
accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time limit required
for journey, after the date of receipt by you of this summons or that of
affixation of the summons upon fulfillment of the legal requirements. If you
make presence, the partition shall be effected by setting aside the partition
shares of all coparceners including you at the same time. But if you fail to
make presence, you shall not be entitled to make a complaint in the future
that the partition was executed in your absence and executed partition was
not proportionate or was unjust. The matter shall be proceeded with in
accordance with law if you do not make presence in the court within the
time limit.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-29
(Relating to sub-section (8) of Section 255)
Format of Summons Issued to Summon the Coparcener Who Is To Give
Partition Share or Who Takes Custody of Property To Be Partitioned
Fifteen-Day Summons issued by the ………..District Court in the name of
Mr./Ms………….., age of …..years, son/ daughter/ husband/ wife of
……………., a resident of ………… village/street, Ward No…..,
………VDC/Municipality, ………….District.
Whereas, final judgment was passed by the………… Court on……….(date)
to execute partition, in the case of………in which …………is plaintiff and
………………is defendant, and whereas, a commission was sent by the
court to execute partition in pursuance of the judgment but you were not
found and any major person in your undivided family did not produce all
properties as set forth in the inventory of property;
Now, therefore, this summons is hereby affixed at your house. You are
hereby required to appear in person in the court or send an attorney or law
practitioner in accordance with law, within fifteen days, excluding the time
limit required for journey, after the date of affixation of the summons, in
order to show and set aside all properties that are to be partitioned and in
your custody, as set forth in the inventory of properties, and effect partition
accordingly. If you fail to make presence in person or send your attorney or
law practitioner, the matter shall be proceeded with in accordance with law.
(Signature)
Done on ………….day of the month of ……..of the year………
Schedule-30
(Relating to Section 268)
Civil cases in which Government is plaintiff
Case involving the right, interest or concern of the Government of
Nepal or any office thereof, court, constitutional body
Case relating to concealment of governmental land
Case relating to concealment of land tax or tariff
Case under Sections 460 and 461 of Chapter-11 of this Code
Case involving the issue of concealment of governmental money or
asset or case involving the matter of determination of governmental
locus standi
Such other civil case as may be specified to be one in which the
Government of Nepal is plaintiff, pursuant to this Code, by the
Government of Nepal from time to time by publishing a notice in the
Nepal Gazette.
Schedule-31
(Relating to Section 285)
Format of Index of Documents
.............................................versus.......................................
Case:
Case file number.........of year........
Serial
number of
documents
Short description of
documents
Name of
parties
submitting
documents
Date of
submission
documents
Signature
employee
Never to
disposed
To be
disposed
after five
years
Signature of preparer:
Signature of certifying officer: