The Prevention of Corruption Act, 2059 (2002 A.D)
Date of Authentication and publication
3 Asadha, 2059 (June 17, 2002)
Act number 1 of the year 2059 (2002)
Preamble : Whereas, it is expe dient to make timely le ga l pro visions re lating
to pre vention of corruption with a view to maintain ing peace, convenience,
financial discipline, morality and good conduct amo ng general public;
Be it enacted by Parliament in the first year of the reign of His Majest y's the King
Gyanendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.

Chapter - 1
Preliminary
1. Short Title, Extent and Commencement: (1) This Act may be called the
"Prevention of Corruption Act, 2059 (2002 A.D.)."
(2) It shall be extended throughout Nepal and appli cable to all
Nepalese citizens, public ser vants residing anywher e outside Nepal and to
the non Nepalese citizens residing in foreign coun tries having committed
any act that may be deemed to be corruption under t his Act.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. Definitions: In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) "Corruption" means offences punishable under Ch apter -2.
(b) "Graft" means cash, goods or any type of gain o r benefit and the
term also includes bribe.
(c) "Public institution" means the following institutions:-
(1) A c om pany, bank or a c ommittee fully or pa rtial ly owned
or c ontr olled by Go ver nment o f N epa l; or a
c om miss ion, organization, authority, corporation, a cademy,
board, center, council or any other cor porate body of such
nature established by Go vernme nt of Nepal;
(2) A university, college, school, r esear ch center and any other
similar a ca dem ic or e duc a t io na l ins t it utio n r un by
Go ve r nm en t of Ne pa l or on the full or partial dona tion
from Government of Nepal;
(3) Local bodies constituted under the Local Self-G overnance Act,
1999;
(4) An institut ion run on loan, grant or guarantee of
Go ver nment of Nepa l;
(5) An institution fully or partially owned or cont rolled by the
institution referred to in Sub-clauses (1), (2), (3 ) or (4) or
obtained grant from such institution; and
(6) Any othe r institution prescr ibed a s public inst itution by
Go ver nment of Nepal in a notification published by the
Nepal Gazette.
(d) "Public Ser va nt" me ans the person holding a pub lic office
under the prevailing laws and the term also include s the following
persons:-
(1) per son a ppointed, nominated or ele cte d under an oa th to
Government of Nepal or to public institution, or un der the
terms, contracts or agreements concluded with Gover nment of
Nepal or with any public institution, or holding an y off ice of
pub lic r esp on sib ilit y f or sa lar y or a llowa nce s or
remuneration or benefit or position with or without any type
of gain from Government of Nepal or any public inst itution;
(2) A per son appointed as an arbitrator or any othe r person
appointed in the same position pursuant to the prev a iling
laws to re solve or adjudicate any dispute;
(3) A person appointed, elected or nominated as liq uidator,
sur veyor or any other person working in the same ca pacity in
accordance with the prevailing laws;
(4) A person designated as public ser vant by Gover nment of
Nepal in a notification published in the Nepal Gaze tte.
(e) "Re ve nue " means any type of tax, fee, charge, r oyalty, fine and other
amount of this type to be pa id or given to Go vernme nt of Nepal
or public institution, and the term also includes i nterest or fine to be
charged on such tax, fees, royalty and other amount of this type.
(f) "Degree of offence" means the degree of offence to be determined on
the basis of circumstances and situation in which t he offence has
been committed or attempted to be committed, the gr a vity of such
offence or the intention, qua lification, position and capacity of
the person who has committed or attempted to commit any offence
punishable under this Act.
(g) "In vestiga ting Authority" means the body or off icia l authorized to
conduct inquiry, investigation and to file cases re lating to
corruption in accordance with the prevailing laws.

Chapter - 2
Provisions Relating to Offences of Corruption and Punishment
3. Punishment to Giver and Take r of Graft: (1) Whoe ver, being, or
expecting to become, a public servant accepts or ag rees to accept graft
amounting as follows for him/herself or for any oth er person in
consideration of his/her performing or having perfo rmed or of
forbearing to perform or having forborne to perform any act pertaining to
his/her office or the related act or in considerati on of favouring or
disfavouring or causing or not causing a loss or of having favoured or
disfavoured or ha ving caused or not caused a loss t o any person while
carrying out his/her official functions, shall be l iable to a punishment of
imprisonment as follows and of a fine as per the am ount involved depending
on the degree of the offence. In case the graft has already been accepted, it
shall be confiscated.
(a) Up to twenty five thousand rupees. Imprisonment for a term not exceeding
three months.
(b) More than twenty five thousand Imprisonment for a term from
rupees to fifty thousand rupees. three to four mon ths.
(c) More than fifty thousand rupees to Imprisonmen t for a term from four
one hundred thousand rupees. to six months.
(d) More than one hundred thousand Imprisonment fo r a term from six
rupees to five hundred thousand months to one year and six months.
rupees.
(e) More than five hundred thousand Imprisonment f or a term from one
rupees to one million rupees. year and six months to two years
and six months.
(f) More than one million rupees to two Imprisonme nt for a term from two
million and five hundred thousand years and six m onths.
rupees.
(g) More than two million and five Imprisonment fo r a term from four
hundred thousand rupees to five to six years.
million rupees.
(h) More than five million rupees to ten Imprisonm ent for a term from six
million rupees. to eight years.
(i) Whatsoever amount above ten Imprisonment for a term from
million rupees. eight to ten years.
(2) Whoever, other than a public ser vant, accepts or agrees to
accept graft amounting as follows for him/herself o r for any other person
with the intention of convincing any public ser vant to perform or forbear
to perform any function under his/her office or pos ition or for convincing
to perform or forbear to perform any such act or wi th the intention of
favoring or disfa voring any person or causing or no t causing any loss or
for convinc ing to perform or forbear to perform any such act while
carrying out any function under his office or posit ion, shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment as follows and of a fine as per the amount involved
depending on the degree of the offence. In case the graft has already been
accepted, it shall be confiscated.
(3) Whoever gives a graft to a public servant or an y other person in order
to do or forbear to do any function pursuant to Sub -Section (1) or (2),
shall be liable to a punishment pursuant to Sub-Sec tion (1) depending on the
degree of the offense committed.
(4) Whoever abates to commit an offence punishable under this Section
shall, if he/she is a public servant, be liable to a punishment as same as the
punishment prescribed for the same offence, and if he/she is any other person, shall
be liable to half of the punishment for that offence on the basis of the degree of the
offence irrespective of whether or not the offence has been committed because of
such abetment.
4. Punishment to Public Servants Accepting Goods or Service Free of Cost
or at Lower Prices: Whoever, being a public servant, accepts or agrees or
attempts to accept, without a prior approval of Gov ernment of Nepal or public
institution, any goods or service free of cost or a t lower prices for him/herself or
for any other person, from any individual, having k nowledge that such individual
is related to or is likely to be related to any act related to his/her office or any act
carried out or to be carried out by him/herself is related to any function of his
office, shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from six months
to one year depending on the degree of the offence and a fine equal to the
amount involved and in case such goods is already a ccepted, it shall be confiscated
and in case of the service, the price thereof shall be fixed and a fine equal to the
price of such service shall be imposed.
5. Punishment for Taking Gift, Present, Award or Do nation: (1) Whoever,
being a public servant, accepts, without a prior ap proval Government of
Nepal or a public institution, any type of donation , gifts, presents, awards or any
type of benefit him/herself or through any member o f his/her family or other
person, so as to causing an impact in any way on an y of his/her works which is
supposed to be carried out by him/her according to the office he/she assumes;
or any public servant who borrows from a person rel ated to a work which he/she
has to carry out according to the office he assumes , shall be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment from three to six months depending on the degree of the offence
and the amount shall be confiscated.
(2) Whoever, being a public servant, has received any present or gift in
exchange of a gift or present brought from the amou nt of a fund
belonging to Government of Nepal or a public instit ution, such gift or present
shall be immediately submitted to his/her office. I f not submitted, it shall be
deemed to have committed the offence referred to in Sub-section (1) and such gift
or present shall be confiscated having him/her punished accordingly.
6. Punishment for Taking Commission: In case any type of commission,
remuneration, brokerage fee, benefit or advantage i s liable to be paid while
performing duties by a public servant or while purc hasing or hiring or taking or
giving on a lease any commodity or service necessar y for Government of
Nepal or a public institution or while awarding or accepting a contract by
Government of Nepal or a public institution or whi le selling or hiring or
taking or giving on a lease any commodity or servic e produced by Government
of Nepal or a public institution, such commission, remuneration, brokerage fee,
benefit or advantage shall be submitted to the conc erned office within seven
days from the date of receipt. In case not submitte d as such, such public servant
shall be deemed to have committed the offence refer red to in Section 3 and the
amount shall be confiscated having him/her punished accordingly.
7. Punishment to Public Servants for Leaking Revenu e: Whoever, being a
public servant under the duty of collecting revenue s, causes revenue leakage or
help or abets any person for its leakage having bee n involved him/herself in
any of the following manners, shall be deemed to ha ve committed the offence
referred to in Section 3 with regard to the amount of revenue so leaked and
he/she shall be liable to the same punishment of im prisonment, and double of
the amount of revenue leaked shall be fined: -
(a) To assist any person in the act of leaking rev enue in any manner
whatsoever, having accepted any cash or kind, fee, prize or donation
or any type of other benefit or forbear to collect revenue or to assist or
cause to assist to collect less revenue having caus ed loss to Government
of Nepal or a public institution by taking or not t aking any type of gain
from any person;
(b) To assess or assist to assess less re venue or to asses s re venue to
the effect of not charging revenue at all by not going through the
documents or not investigating such documents or by not collecting
necessary evidence while assessing revenue as requi red by the
existing law;
(c) To embezz le the re venue collecte d by not deposi ting it in
accordance with the prevailing laws;
(d) To release or assist to release goods, by makin g difference in the
invoice, quality or quantity of suc h goods, and w it hout c ollecting
the pre scr ibed re venue while assessing the revenue or carrying out
valuation of such goods.
8. Punishment to Public Servants for Getting Illegal B enefit or Causing
Illegal Loss with Mala fide Intention: (1) Whoever, being a public servant,
commits any of the following acts with the mala fide intention of getting
illegal benefits for him/herself or for any other p erson, or of causing loss to
Government of Nepal or public institution, shall be liable to an
imprisonment of a term from three months to three y ears depending on
the degree of offe nce, and in case the amount invol ving the offence is
known, suc h amount sha ll be conf isc a te d ha ving h im / he r fined
a cc or dingly. In c a se such am ount is not kn ow n, an i mprisonment for
a term from three months to three years and a fine from ten thousand to
fifty thousand rupees shall be imposed.
(a) To show more costs or wor ks in an unnatural man ner
without any gr ound of justification while conductin g physibility
study of, or setting norms for, a project.
(b) To use or allow to use the construction materia ls of lower
quality than that of the prescr ibed qua lity, or to certify or
to approve the use of such ma ter ials as the materia ls of
prescribed quality;
(c) To degrade the quality of construction work or to change the
form or shape thereof or to car ry out or cause to c arr y out
construction wor ks in contra vention of the pre scr ib ed
ter ms, c onditions and standa r d; or to cer tify or to
appr ove suc h construction work as qualitative and u nder
the prescribed terms and conditions without any rea sonable
ground;
(d) To carry out or cause to carry out construction works having
increased or amended the costs estimate in an unnat ural manner
and without any reasonable ground;
(e) To give or receive payment having prepared fals e bills or
receipts or to give or receive double payment of bi lls;
(f) To procure or cause to procure excessive quanti ty of goods in
an unnatural manner than the quantity needed withou t reasonable
grounds;
(g) To carry out or cause to carry out unnatural va luation of a
government property, a property of a public organiz ation or of
public property;
(h) To register, occupy or use or to cause to regis ter, occupy or use
a government or public property in one's own name o r in the
name of other in an illegal manner;
(i) To value or cause to value a collateral securit y to be
mortgaged in the name of a governmental or public
organization in an excessive and unreasonable price s than the
real prices;
(j) To procure or cause to procure goods of degradi ng quality,
date expired and to pr ocure or ca use to proc ure goo ds
having pa id higher pr ices in an unnatural manner.
(2) In case any public ser vant does not return a ve hicle or a facility
available to him/her by virtue of his/her official position within the
prescribed time after the expiry of the official po sition without any
reasonable ground, he/she shall be liable to a fine from one thousand to
five thousand rupees depending on the degree of the offense and such
vehicle or facility shall be taken back.
(3) Whoever, being a public servant, causes any typ e of loss to a
governmental or public property with mala fide intention having
committed any act excluding the acts referred to in Sub-Section (1) and (2),
shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment not exceeding two years or of
a fine equal to the amount of the loss or both depe nding on the degree of
the offence.
(4) In case any per son other than a public serva nt , w ith mala
fide intention of making ille ga l ga into him/herself or to any other
person, does not abide by the terms and conditions of an oath,
undertaking, agreement, contract, license, permit, promissory note or
dealership entered into with Government of Nepal o r a public institution or
carries out business or misuses the facilities or p owers of governmental or
such institution violating the Rules or Procedures determined by or terms
and conditions accepted by Government of Nepal or such institution in a
manner prohibited by the pre vailing law, he/she sha ll be lia ble to a
punishment of im pr isonme nt not exceeding two years and be fined
according to the amount of loss and the amount of loss shall be confiscated.
9. Punishment to Public Servants Preparing False Do cuments: Whoever,
being a public ser vant under the duty of preparing documents, prepares
false documents with mala fide intention of causing loss to Government of
Nepal or Government or public institution, shall be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment for a term from three months to one year, and a fine from ten
thousand to fifty thousand rupees.
10. Punishment for Translating False Documents: Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person authorized or designate d to translate
documents, wrongly translates documents, translates documents
incorporating therein false particulars or makes di fference in the name,
surname, date, facts or other particulars with the mala fide intention of
causing loss to Government of Nepal, a Government or public institution;
or with the intention of getting illegal benefit to him/herself or to any other
person, shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from
three months to one year and of a fine from ten tho usand to fifty thousand
rupees, depending on the degree of offence committed.
11. Punishment for Tempering Government Documents: Whoever, either a
public servant or any other person, corrects, adds, or changes in
documents belonging to a government or public insti tution without
authority or in an illegal manner, shall be liable to a punishment of
imprisonment for a term from three months to two ye ars and a fine not
exceeding fifty thousands rupees.
12. Punishment for Causing Damage to Government or Public Documents:
Whoever, being a public servant, conceals a documen t belonging to
government or to a public institution or c ause s dam age to, or destroys,
suc h doc ument, sha ll be lia ble to a punishme nt of i m pr isonment
from six month to one year and shall be fine d fr om ten thousand to
fifty thousa nd rupee s. In ca se any loss is inc urr ed due to such
conce a lment, dam age or destruction, the loss shall also be recovered.
13. Punishment for Disclosing Secrecy of Question P apers or Altering the
Result of Examination: Save in cases where the authorized person
discloses or causes to disclose que stion pa pers of an examination to be
conduc ted by a governme nt body or a public institut ion be fore the
prescr ibe d time ha ving given reasons of spec ia l c ir c umsta nces,
whoever, being a public servant, discloses or cause s to disclose the secrecy
of such question paper in any manner whatsoe ver, or alters or causes to
alter the results of examinations with the intentio n of making illegal
advantage to him/herself or any other person, shall be liable to a
punishment of impr isonment from three months to one year and shall be
fined from five thousand to ten thousand rupees.
14. Punishment to Public Servants Engaging in Illeg al Trade or Business:
Whoever, being a public ser vant, engages in trade o r business in his/her
own name or in the name of other person or in partn ership with others,
takes part in auction or bidding, or becomes a part ner in any firm or
company or a cooperative organization while being p rohibited by law, shall
be liable a punishment of imprisonment for a term f rom three months to
six months and a fine from ten thousand to fifty th ousand rupees, and the
property earned in such a manner shall be confiscat ed.
Provided that, this section shall not be deemed to have hindered to
subscribe shares of a public limited company called for public subscription.
15. Punishment for Claiming False Designation: Whoever, either a public
servant or any other person falsely claims that he/ she holds any position,
power, capacity or facility or enjoys such position , power, capacity or facility
of a public servant which he/she is not entitled to or displays any symbol, dress
or mark relating to a position of a public ser vant or wears or displays any
object resembling to such symbol, dress or mark wit h the intention of
leading others to falsely believe that these are the official symbols, dresses
or marks of a public servant, shall be liable to a punishment of
imprisonment for a term from one year to two years and with a fine from
fifty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees, depe nding on the degree
of the offence committed.
16. Punishment for Giving False Particulars: (1) Whoe ver, with the
intention of secur ing a position of a public ser van t, or of being continue
in such a position, or of securing any position or of getting any benefit or
facility, gives false particulars regarding his edu cational qua lifications,
name, names of the father and grandfather, age, cas te, surname, address,
nationality or qualification, or gives false descri ption in any other matters,
or submits false certificate relating thereto, shal l be liable to a punishment
of imprisonment for a term from six months to one y ear and of a fine from
ten thousand to twenty thousand rupees, depending o n the degree of the
offense committed.
(2) Whoe ver, being a public servant under the duty of giving
statement of his/her property under this Act or any other prevailing
laws, gives false statement either ha ving increased or having concealed
the actual property belonging to or registered in h is/her name or under
his/her share entitlement or belonging to his/her j oint family, shall be liable
to a punishment of impr isonment for a term from one month to three
months and the fine not exceeding ten thousand rupe es. The property,
which has been concealed in such a manner, shall al so be confiscated.
17. Punishment for Damaging Public Property: W h oe ver , b e in g a pub lic
ser va nt, misappropriates, causes loss to or abuses or causes others to do
so, or destroys or uses for personal purposes, whil e performing his/her
duties pertaining to his/her office, shall be liabl e to be punished pursuant
to Section 3 and the property which has been misapp ropriated, damaged,
misused or destroyed or caused others to do so, shall be recovered from him/her.
18. Punishment for Exerting Illegal Pressures: Whoe ver, either a public
ser vant or any other person, compels any public ser vant or any other
person to commit any offence punishable urder this Act by exercise of
fear or threat of under, kidnapping, taking away of property, of causing
adverse impact on prestige or by exerting any other type of illegal pressure,
shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from four to
eight years and a fine from one hundred thousand to five hundred thousand
rupees.
19. Punishment for Giving False Report: (1) Whoe ver, either a public
ser vant or any other person authorized to carry out auditing in a
government body or in a public institution, pre pare s auditing report
with mala fide intention ha ving shown the facts not done or happe ned
in the transaction or ha ving concealed the facts do ne or happened, shall be
liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term f rom three months to
one year and to a fine from ten thousand rupee s to fifty thousand r upees
depending on the degree of the offe nce committed.
(2) Save as provided in Sub-section (1), in case any public
ser vant or any other person under the duty of submi tting report having
conducted a study or investigation on any subject i n connection with
functions of government body or public institution, prepares report with
mala fide intention ha ving shown the facts actually not done or
happened or ha ving concealed the facts actually don e or happened, such
persons shall be liable to a punishment of imprisonment for a term from
three months to one year and to the fine from ten t housand rupees to
fifty thousand rupees depe nding on the de gree of the offence
committed.
20. Property Deemed to be Acquired Illegally: (1) In case the statement of
property submitted in accordance with prevailing la ws by a public servant
deemed to ha ve held a public office in acc orda nce w ith prevailing laws
seems to be inc ompa tible or unnatura l or in case he /she maintains an
incompatible or unsuitable lifestyle or it is prove d that he/she has given
someone a donation, gift, grant, present or has len t money beyond
his/her capacity, he/she sha ll prove the sources fr om which he/she has
acquired such property and if he fails to do so, su ch property shall be
deemed to have been acquired in an illegal manner.
(2) In case it has been proved that a public servan t has acquired property
in an illegal manner as referred to in Sub-section (1), he/she shall be liable to a
punishment of imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years as per the
amount of the property acquired in such a manner, and a fine according to the
amount of property and the illegal property acquire d in such a manner shall also
be confiscated.
21. Punishment for Committing Attempts: Except otherwise provided for in
this chapter, whoever attempts to commit an offense punishable under this Act
shall be liable to half of the punishment to be imp osed on the public servant or
any other person committing such offences.
22. Punishment to Accomplices: Except otherwise provided elsewhere in this
Act, the accomplices to any offense punishable unde r this Act shall be liable to
half of the punishment to be imposed on the public servant or any other person
committing such offences.
Provided that, the accomplice who has given cash o r kind or made
available any other type of benefit to the public s ervant or any other person
committing an offence or who has taken such benefit shall be liable to the
punishment as equal to the person committing the offence.
23. Principal to be Deemed to have Committed the Offence in case a
Corporate Body Commits Offence: In case any firm, company or corporate
body commits any act that is deemed to be an offenc e under this chapter, the
partners at the time of commission of the act in ca se of a firm and the person
acting as the principal official in case of a compa ny or a corporate body shall be
deemed to have committed the offence.
Provided that, in case it is proved that such act has been committed prior to
the appointment of the person acting as the princip al official, the person who has
committed the act shall be deemed to have committed the offence.
Explanation:
For the purpose of this Section, the "the person ac ting as the
principal official" means the Chairman, Board Membe r, General Manager,
Managing Director or the Official of a company or c orporate body working in
the same capacity.
24. Additional Punishment: In case the offences under this chapter have been
committed by an office bearer of a constitutional organ or body to be nominated or
appointed by officer belonging to the special class of Government of Nepal or
officers of equivalent rank; Head, General Manager or officer of a public
institution of equivalent rank, such person shall b e liable to the punishment of
imprisonment for a term of three years in addition to the punishment prescribed for
such offence.

Chapter - 3
Investigations, Inquiries and Filling of Cases of Corruption
25. Investigations and Inquiries: (1) In case the investigating authority comes to
know, through any information, source or a complain t lodged by any person, that
any person has committed or is going to commit corr uption, it shall initiate
necessary investigations, inquiries and other actions in this regard.
(2) Notwithstanding a nything conta ine d in Sub-Sect ion ( 1),
in case the investigating authority has received in formation from any source that
any person has committed or is going to commit corr uption, such authority
may take immediate actions including raid, seizure of documents or goods and
materials or arrest of person.
26. Preliminary Inquiry: The investigating authority shall, upon having rece ived
a complaint or information that one has committed o r is going to commit an
offence under this Act, initiate preliminary inquir y confidentially as may be
necessary.
27. Seeking Explanation: While conducting preliminary inquiry pursuant to

Section 26, in case the investigating authority is of the view that the
information received is based on facts, it may, hav ing provided particulars
relating thereto, seek for comment or explanation f rom the concerned body or
person as may be necessary.
28. Powers of Investigating Authority: (1) The investigating authority may, while
conducting investigations and inquiries into offens es of corruption under this
Chapter, exercise the following powers: -
(a) To order a government body, public institution , public servant
or any other person to send or submit within a cert ain time
any relevant document, documentary evidences or any other
things before it;
(b) To conduct inquiry with, or to record the state ment of, the
public servant or any other person accused of corru ption or
the person to whom the inve stigating authority deem s to
having information on the relevant facts;
(c) The investigating authority may, upon having ta ken
explanation from or upon completing inquiry or reco rding
the statement of a public ser vant or any other pers on accused
of corruption, release such person having executed a bond
from him/her to appear as and when required, or ha v ing
required him/her to appear on the prescribed date o r, in case
there is a reasonable cause to believe that such pu blic
ser vant or person may absc ond or there has bee n a l oss of
an amount, the investiga ting author ity may ask from
him/her to submit a deposit or guarantee and requir e
him/her to appear in the prescribed date or in case no
deposit or guarantee is produced, keep him/her in c ustody.
(2) In case the investigating authority has sent a letter having
fixed a time lim it to the concerned body, public se r vant or other person
requiring to submit any document or any other mater ial or to provide
information on any matter or requiring a public ser vant or any other
person to appear before it, it shall be done accord ingly and in case not done,
it shall be as follows:-
(a) In case the concerned government body or public institution
does not submit such document or materia l or does n ot
provide information w ithin the time pre scr ibed, the
inve stigating authority may send a letter to the co ncerned
government body or a public institution to take dep artmental
action against the chief officer of the concerned g overnment
body or a public institution and in case such a let ter is
receive d, the concerned governme nt body or a public
institution shall take actions immediately.
(b) In case the concerned public ser vant or any oth er person does
not submit the document or materia l or doe s not pro vide
information or does not appear within the prescribe d
period, the investigating authority may impose a fi ne not
exceeding one thousand rupees on such person.
(c) In case any government body, public institution , public
ser vant or any other person does not do as required to do in
writing by the investigating authority e ven after t he
departmental action or imposition of a fine pursuan t to Clauses
(a) or (b), the investigating authority may issue a rrest
warrant to get the chief officer of such body or in stitute or
such public ser vant or other person appeared and ge t such
document or material produced or acquired necessary
information from him/her. In case the chief officer of a body
or institution, public servant or any other person so arrested
does not submit such document or material or does n ot give
information relating thereto, the investigating aut hor ity
may order for keeping him/her in custody for a peri od of up to
seven days.
(3) After the investigating author ity's order for departmental
action or payment of the fine pursuant to Sub-secti on (2), in case the chief
officer of the concerned body or the concerned publ ic ser vant or any other
person submits an application along with reasonable causes for being
unable to do as required, and if the causes are sat isfactory, such order or
order of fine may be cancelled.
(4) The inve stigating author ity may conduct or cau se to
conduct a search at any place and se ize any necessa ry materia ls or
document or P hotostat copy thereof while conducting the search. A
receipt of the material or document so seized shall be given to the
concerned person.
29. Appointment or Designation of Investigation Of ficer : The investigation
authority may, in order to conduct investigation an d inquir ies into the
offences punishable under this Act, appoint or desi gnate any officer under
it or any government officer or any officer of a pu blic institution as the
investigation officer.
Provided that, while appointing or designating any government
officer, or officer of a public institution as the investigating officer,
consultation shall be held with Government of Nepal or with the Chief
Officer of the concerned body, depending on circumstances.
30. Functions, Duties and Powers of the Investigati on Officer
: (1) Functions,
duties and powers of the investigation officer shall be as follows:-
(a) To arrest the offender immediately and to take necessary actions;
(b) To conduct or cause to conduct search at any of fice, house,
building, godown, vehicle or any other places while
conducting investigation and inquiries or while col lecting
evidence into offences punishable under this Act;
(c) To exercise other powers conferred on the inves tigation officer.
(2) While conducting investigation and inquiries into offences
punishable under this Act, the investigation office r shall have all such
powers, duties, facilities and obligation as the po lice is ha ving under the
pre vailing laws in respect to recording statements of the accused persons,
and preparing reports of public inquiries.
(3) While carrying out functions under Sub-section (2), the
investigation officer may exercise the powers equiv alent to the powers of a
court to require the accused to appear on prescribe d date or to release
him/her on deposit or on guarantee or detain him/he r in case he is unable
to furnish such deposit or guarantee as may be necessary.
31. Keeping Accused in Custody: (1) The investigation officer may, in case
there is sufficient ground that any person ha ving b een taken action for an
offence under this Act may lose or destroy any e vid ence or cause
hindrance in the process of investigation or inquir ies or cause adverse
impact thereon, keep him/her in custody having give n him an order of
detention in accordance with the prevailing laws.
(2) In case the investigation or inquiries with reg ard to a person is
not completed within twenty four hours and it appea rs that the
investigation needs to be continued ha ving him/her detained, the
investigation officer shall detain him/her after ha ving him/her presented
before the authority hearing the case and only afte r getting approval
therefor from the authority hearing the case. While seeking for approval
with the authority hearing the case, the charges ag ainst the person
detained, its bases, the reason for continuing inve stigation having him/her
detained and if his/her statement has been recorded , the contents of such
statement shall be clearly stated.
(3) The person who has been presented before the au thority
hearing the case for approval of detention pursuant to Sub-section (2)
may submit an application while being presented the re requesting for his/her
physical checkup.
(4) In case a permission for detention is sought pu rsuant to Subsection (2), the authority hearing the case may, ha ving considered whether
or not the investigation has been carried out in a satisfactory manner and
if it is found that the investigation is being carr ied out satisfactor ily, give
approval for detention for a maximum period of six months not
exceeding thirty days at a time or time and again.
(5) While seeking for a permission for extension of time duration
of detention pursuant to Sub-section (4), the perso n under the custody
may, if he/she so wants, submit an application to t he authority hearing the
case mentioning the reason or basis for his/her not being in detention any
longer.
32. Cooperation of Other Bodies May be Required: (1) The investigating
authority may, in course of in ve stigations and inqu ir ies into offenses
punishable under this Act, ask any government body or public institution
or any person for cooperation as may be necessary and it shall be the duty of
such body, institution or person to cooperate as and when required.
(2) The investigating authority may, in course of c onducting
investigation and inquir ies into offenses of corrup tion under this Act,
take the help of police force as well. While engagi ng police personnel in
the work, the order issued by the investigating aut hority shall, with regard
to the police, be equivalent to the order of the co ncerned Inspector General
of Police.
(3) The inve stigation officer may ask the police of ficer or
police personne l subordinate to him/her for help. I t shall be the duty of the
concerned police officer or personnel to assist him /her in case the investigation
officer requires such assistance.
(4) In case the investigating authority deems it fi t that because of
the very nature of the offence under investigation and inquiry, it is
necessary to consult an expert engaged in any agenc y to be involved in such
investigation and inquiry; the investigating author ity may ask the
concerned body to make such expert a vailable on a t emporary
assignment for a specific period of time, and in ca se such a demand is
made, such body shall, notwithstanding anything con tained in the prevailing
laws, make available the concerned expert.
33. Automatic Suspension : In case any public servant is detained pursuant to
Clause (c) of Subsection (1) of Section 28, Sub-sec tion (3) of Section 30
and Section 31, he shall ipso facto be suspended until the period of
detention and if a case is filed against him/her pu rsuant to Section 36,
he/she shall ipso facto be suspended unless and until the proceedings of the case is
over.
34. Accepting Services: ( 1) T he in ve s t i ga t i n g a ut h or ity m a y , w h ile
c on du c t in g investigation, inquiries and taking any other actions
relating thereto, require ser vices of experts of the concerned subject or of
specialized agencies.
(2) The investigating authority shall, in order to get the ser vices
referred to in sub-section (1), appoint the concern ed expert or specialized
agency and while appointing as such, the investigat ing authority shall
have to enter into an agreement having stated the f unctions to be carried
out by such expert or specialized agency, the power s that may be
exercised, the terms and conditions to be fulfilled , the procedures and
remuneration and other benefits which such expert o r specialized agency is
entitled to.
(3) In case the investigating authority is in need of the service of
employees of Government of Nepal or of a specialize d agency,
notwithstanding anything contained in the pr eva ilin g law s, such
employees sha ll be depute d for a per iod re quire d by the investigating
authority.
35. Keeping in Postponement: While inquiring and investing under this Act,
in case it appears that the alleged offense could n ot be proved on the
basis of the collected evidence, the investigating authority may keep the
complaint in postponement issuing an order slip alo ng with reasons
thereof and in case of decision of postponement, the information thereof
shall be given to the accused person and the complainant.
Provided tha t, nothin g in this se ction shall be de emed to ha ve
pre vented to investigate and re-inquire on such com plaint if any new evidence
is found later on.
36. Filing of cases: In connection with an accusation of commission of
corruption, in case there is a reasonable cause to believe that the accused has
committed the said offence, the investigating autho rity shall file a case
before the authority having powers to hear the case under the prevailing
laws.

Chapter - 4
Provisions Relating to Prevention of Corruption
37. National Vigilance Center: (1) Government of Nepal may establish a
National Vigilance Center under the direct control and super vision of the
Prime Minister in order to effectively control corr uption-oriented acts and to
promote people's awareness against corruption.
(2) Government of Nepal may designate a special cla ss officer of
the civil service as the chief of the Center referr ed to in Sub-section (1), and
there shall be other officials of the services of G overnment of Nepal in the
center as may be necessary.
38. Functions, Duties and Powers of the National Vigilance Center: The
National Vigilance Center established under Sub-Sec tion (1) of Section 37
shall have following functions, duties and powers:-
(a) To collect information on whether or not the fu nctions to be
carried out by the Ministries, Departments, offices of Government
of Nepal and public institution are being regularly carried out;
(b) To alert Ministr ies, Departments, Offices of Go vernment of Nepal,
or public institution in case the functions to be c arried out by them
are not found to ha ve been carried out;
(c) To monitor the statement of property and income given by persons
holding a public post as per the prevailing laws;
(d) To make necessary provision for regular surve il lance, surprise
check and investigation in corruption prone places or works;
(e) To make necessary recommendations to Government of Nepal with
regard to the policies, strategies and reformation on laws to be adopted for
corruption control;
(f) To make provision of a complaint box in the Min istries of Government of
Nepal, Departments, Offices or public institution;
(g) To provide any suggestion or direction to the c oncerned bodies with
(h) To collect necessary description or informatio n concerning
corruption from the body or authority working for i nvestigation into
offences of corruption and to maintain them updated ;
(i) To forward any information concerning corruptio n received to it to
the concerned bodies;
(j) To carry out or cause to carry out other incide ntal functions with
regard to corruption control;
(k) To carry out or cause to carry out other functi ons prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.

Chapter - 5
Miscellaneous
39. Statement May be Taken or Transaction or Accou nt May be Freeze: (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the existing law, if it appears from any
source during the course of investigation into offe nces of corruption that there has
been financial transaction or operation of an accou nt in the name of any person
with any bank or financial institution within the c ountry or in any foreign
country, the investigating authority may order to f reeze such transaction or
account. The concerned bank or financial institute shall freeze such transaction or
account in accordance with the order of the investigating authority.
Provided that in case such transaction or account to be freeze is with
a bank or financial institution in a foreign countr y, the investigation authority
may cause to freeze the operation of transaction or account through the diplomatic
channel.
(2) The investigating authority may impose a fine o f fifty thousand rupees
in maximum to the chief of the concerned bank or fi nancial institution located
in Nepal not freezing transactions or accounts purs uant to Sub-section (1).
(3) The investigation authority may, if it deems fi t in the course of
investigation, according to the need, ask for the s tatement of property
belonging to persons holding an office of public re sponsibility or freeze such
property.
40 . Banning to Issue or Freezing Passport: Notwithstanding anything
contained in the prevailing laws, the investigating authority may, on the basis
of the gravity of the offence, the condition, circu mstances in which the accused
committed the offence, degree of the offence and the punishment in case of
conviction of the offence, issue an order to the co ncerned bodies for not
issuing passport to any accused or for withholding it if it has been already
issued.
41. Restriction to Leave Places : In case an action has been taken against any
person under this Act, the investigating authority may, on the basis of the
gravity of the offence, the condition and circumsta nces in which the accused
committed the offence, the degree of the offence an d the punishment in case of
conviction of the offence, issue an order to any ac cused not to leave any place or
not to go any particular place without the approval of the investigating
authority.
42. Provision Relating to Service of Summons: (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in the existing law, while servi cing summon in the name of
a foreigner in any offence under this Act, the summ on may be served to the
office or representative of such person within of N epal, if any, and service of
summon in that manner shall be deemed to have duly made.
(2) In case there is no office or representative re ferred to in sub-Section
(1), the summon shall be served to the main place o f transaction, or to the address
of such person where he resides permanently, or to the address of correspondence
given by such person in connection with his busines s transaction through the
means of telex, fax or any other means of te lecommu nication in written
form or through registered post, and the summons se r ved in any of such
manners shall be deemed to have been duly made.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-secti ons (1) or (2),
this Section shall not be deemed to have hindered t he service of summons
according to the provisions of a treaty in case the re is a separate provision for
service of summons in the name of persons living in a foreign country in any
treaty to which Government of Nepal or of Nepal is a party.
43. Publication of Notice: Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevaili ng
laws, in case it has been reported that no notice c ould be served while sending a
notice or servicing a summon in the name of any per son in accordance with
this Act or other prevailing laws for not finding t he address of such
person or for any other reasons, a public notice shall be published least
for twice in a national le vel newspaper (in case of a foreigner in a
English Daily) having given him/her a time limit of 30 days and ha ving
given short description as to whether the investiga tion is underway or the
case is already filed at the authority hearing the case; and in case a notice
has been published in such a way, the notice shall be or summon deemed
to have been duly de livered or served to such perso n notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws.
44. Obligations of government bodies and public ins titutions: The chief
of a government body and public institution shall, in case any
information has been received that corruption has b een committed at his
office or any other office under him, immediately t ake the related
documents or file under his custody and keep it saf e, and upon having
inquired with the persons and officials related to such subject and upon
having known the reality, if there appears any reas on of commission of
corruption, he shall forward such documents to the concerned body for
investigation and inquiry.
45. Case May be Filed against Retired Person: Nothing in this Act sha ll
be deemed to have pre vented filling of a case again st a retired public
servant in connection with commission of corruption ha ving embezzled
or causing loss to government or public pr operty or the property
belonging to an organization owned by Government o f Nepal e ven after
such public servant is retired from the service.
No Hindrance to Initiate Proceedings and Finalize C ase :
Notwithstanding anything contained in the prevaili ng laws, there shall
be no hindrance to initiate proceedings and finaliz e a case even if the
accused or defendant dies before or after a case un der this Act is filed.
47. Confiscation of Property: In case it is proved that any person has
earned property ha ving committed any act which is d eemed to ha ve
committed corruption under this Act or other prevai ling laws and has
kept such property and the property accrued therefr om in his/her own
name or in the name of anybody else such property shall be confiscated.
Provided that, in case the ownership of such proper ty is transferred to
any person and in case the price of such a property is quoted, the
transaction involving such amount shall be treated as a simple loan deed.
48. Order to Freeze Property of a Foreigner: (1) In case any foreigner
who does not appear before the investigating author ity in pursuance of a
notice sent by the investigating authority or summo n served pursuant to

Section 42 is having any pr operty, entitlement, int erest or concern
within of Nepal, the investigating authority may order to maintain a
status quo with regard to them or not to allow to take such pr operty,
entitlement, interest or conce rn outside of Ne pa l u nle ss and until such
a person appear s be fore the investigating authority , and it shall be the duty
of all concerned to abide by such an order.
(2) The in vestigating a uthor ity may impose a fine of one
thousa nd rupees in maximum to the person who does n ot abide by the
order made pursuant to Subsection (1) and in case any type of loss or
damage is caused to Government of Nepal or a publi c institution because
of non-observance of such an order, such loss shall also be recovered from
him/her.
49. Punishment for Filing False Complaint: In case it is found that any
person has filed a false complaint against any publ ic ser vant or person
without ha ving any reasonable ground for filing a c omplaint and with the
intention of causing any type of loss, damage or ha rassment, the
investigating authority may impose a fine not excee ding five thousand
rupees on him.
50. Provision Relating to Statement of Property : (1) Whoe ver joins a
public office shall, within sixty days from the dat e of joining the public
office, and whoever is engaged in a public office o n the da te of
commencement of this Sec tion sha ll, within sixty da ys from the date
of commencement of this Act, and thereafter within sixty days from the
date of completion of each fiscal year, submit the up dated statement of
property in his/her name or in the name of his/her fam ily mem bers a long
with the sources or e vidence there of to the body or author ity
prescr ibe d by Go vernment of Nepa l ha ving published a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) In case the person assuming a public office who is unable to
submit the statement of property within the time li mit referred to in Subsection (1) makes a request for extension of the ti me limit having stated
therein the reasons for his/her not being able to s ubmit such statement, the
concerned body or authority may extend the time lim it for a period of
thirty days in maximum.
(3) The person assuming a public office who does no t submit the
statement of property within the time limit extende d pursuant to Subsection (2) shall be liable to a fine of five thous and rupees and the
concerned body or official may investigate ha ving s uspected that there is
illegal property in his/her and his/her family memb er's names.
(4) The statement of property submitted under this section Shall
be confidential.
Provided that, if statement of property is required in connection with
investigation and inquiries under this Act, such st atement may be made
available to the concerned authority.
51. Punishment to Persons Causing Hindrance and O bstruction: The
authority hearing the case may, on the basis of the report of investigating
authority, impose a punishment of imprisonment of a term of six months in
maximum or a fine up to five thousand rupees in max imum or both to a person
who causes hindrance or obstruction in actions rela ting to investigation and
inquiries under this Act.
52. Confidentiality of Information: (1) No notice, information or evidence
received to, collected by, the investigating author ity in connection with
investigation and inquiry in an offence of corrupti on shall be publicly notified
before filing of case.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-sect ion (1), the
investigating authority may publicize particulars o f inquiry and
investigation of any matter of public importance which it deems fit as may be
necessary.
53. Departmental Action to Employees Involved in In quiries and
Investigation: In connection with implementation of this Act, in c ase it is
proved that the investigation officer or other empl oyee engaged in investigation
and inquiries has committed any act knowingly with the intention of causing
harassment to any person, departmental action shall be taken against such
employees.
54. To be subjected to Imprisonment: Notwithstanding anything contained
in the pre vailing laws, the person having been puni shed by a court with a
term of imprisonment shall be subjected only to imp risonment.
55. Remission in the Claim of Punishment: The investigating authority may
give complete or partial remission in the claim of punishment with regard to
the accused who assists in the process of investiga tion carried out under this
Act having him/herself presented as a witness on it s behalf.
Provided that in case other e vidences do not prove his assistance or in case
he becomes hostile later on, the case may be filed against him again
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in other prevailing laws.
56. No Action to be Taken: Notwithstanding anything contained in the
pre vailing laws, no action shall be taken against a public servant for
disclosing confidentiality under the law relating t o the terms and condition of
his/her service who gives information for taking le gal action in case of corruption
committed or going to be committed or for preventing to be committed.
57. Delegation of Power: (1) The investigating authority may, by publication
of a notification in the Nepal Gazette, delegate it s all or any power conferred on
it by this Act to any of the Government of Nepal's gazetted level officers.
(2) While delegating power pursuant to Sub-section (1), the
territorial jurisdiction for the powers to be accou ntable by such officer
shall be as prescribed in such notification.
(3) The officer exercising the power conferred on h im under sub Section (1) shall, for that purpose, be responsible to the investigating authority.
58. Provision Relating to Rewards: The investigating authority may give an
appropriate reward to the person assisting it in co nnection with inquires,
investigation or collection of evidences in the off ences punishable under this Act.
59. Special Provisions Relating to Cases of Corrup tion: Notwithstanding
anything contained in the prevailing laws, it shall be as follows in the
following matters with regard to the cases filed un der this Act:-
(a) In case any public servant or any other person has, while committing or in
connection with committing an act that is deemed to be an offence under
other prevailing laws, there shall be no hindrance to file separate case in
accordance with other prevailing laws.
(b) In case there has been adverse impact caused on the rights, property or
interests of any person while committing or in conn ection with committing
an act that is deemed to be an offence under this Act by a public servant or
any other person, there shall be no hindrance for s uch person to file a
separate case.
(c) In cases where a case has been filed against a person for an offence
under this Act and it appears later on, after havin g examined the
evidence, that the case must be filed against other person as well, there
shall be no hindrance to file a separate charge sheet against such person.
(d) Nothing shall be deemed to prevent filling of a separate case against
any public servant or person for offenses to be lia ble under this Act, even
if the separate case has been already filed against such person in order to
recover loss and damages made by such person to Gov ernment of Nepal
or public institution illegally;
(e) In case, where a case has been filed under this Act against any public
servant or other person, there shall be no hindranc e to file a case under this
Act or the case filed shall not be dismissed merely for the reason that
there is a legal provision of recovery of the loss caused to Government of
Nepal or a public institution from such public servant or other person.
(f) No cases filed under this Act shall be withdraw n or compromised.
60. Informer and his/her details to be kept confidentia l: The name or
address of an informer providing information that a n offence under this Act
has been committed or going to be committed shall b e kept confidential in case
he/she so requests.
61. Unclaimed goods to be entitled to Government o f Nepal: (1) In case
no owner of the goods related to the offence punish able under this Act is traced,
the investigating authority shall publish a public notice requiring the claimant, if
any, of the goods so seized to claim the goods, wit hin a time limit of thirty five
days.
(2) In case, no claim is made within the time limit referred to in subsection (1) or even if the claim is made but in abs ence of proof the claim is not
tenable, such goods shall be the property of Govern ment of Nepal having treated
such goods as unclaimed goods.
62. Goods may be sold: (1) In case it appears that any goods seized in con nection
with an offence punishable under this Act would be damaged or broken for
storing for a long time due to rust or for any othe r reason or would be rotten or
damaged or price of such goods would go down for being old or would be
useless or it could not be stored or maintained for lack of space, such goods
may be sold having completed the process thereof in accordance with the
prevailing laws.
(2) The amount received from the sale pursuant to Sub-section
(1) shall be deposited to the deposit accounts. In case it has been decided that
such goods has to be given to the concerned owner, he shall be entitled only to the
amount received from the sale.
63. No Hindrance to Exercise Powers: Nothing in this Act shall be deemed
to have hindered any author ity or officer to exerci se powers under other
prevailing laws with regard to investigation, inqui res, other actions and filing
or cases relating to corruption.
64. Power to Frame Rules: Government of Nepal may frame necessary Rules for
implementing the objectives of this Act.
65. Amendment, Repeal and Saving: (1) The following Sections of the Revenue
(Investigation and Control) Act, 2052 have been repealed,-
(a) Clause (c) of Section 2;
(b) Sub-section (2) of Section 6;
(c) The terms "or employee" appearing in sub-Sectio n (4) of Section 9;
(d) Sub-section (2) of Section 18;
(e) Sub-section (2) of Section 21;
(f) Sub-section (2) of Section 23;
(g) The terms "or corruption" frequently used in pl ace to place;
(h) Section 5, chapter 4 and Section 25.
(2) The Pre vention of Corruption Act, 2017 has been repealed.
(3) All actions taken and proceedings initiated und er the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 2017 shall be deemed to have been t aken or initiated under
this Act.