The Public Health Service Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 11 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Public Health Service
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary legal provisions for implementing the right
to get free basic health service and emergency health service guaranteed by the Constitution of
Nepal and establishing access of the citizens to health service by making it regular, effective,
qualitative and easily available,
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter-1
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Public Health
Service Act, 2075 (2018)."
(2) This Act shall come into force immediately.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act-
(a) "Emergency health service" means the initial and immediate service to be
provided as it is necessary to free the lives of the persons from risk, save the
lives or organs from being lost, whose lives are in the risky condition up on
falling into unexpected incident or emergency condition.
(b) "Basic health service" means promotional, retributive, diagnostic, remedial and
rehabilitative service easily and freely available from the state for the sake of
fulfillment of health n eed of citizens generally, pursuant to sub-section (4) of

Section 3.
(c) "Non-governmental or private health institution" means a health institution
operated with the investment and ownership of the non-governmental or private
sector, upon receiving permission under the prevailing law.
(d) "Physician" means a person registered in the concerned Council as a physician
under the prevailing law.
(e) "Public health supervisor" means the office -bearer designated for monitoring
and regulation related to public health.
(f) "Risk zone" means a workplace with any chemical, biological, climate change
based, psycho -social, corporal, physical and geographic condition adversely
affecting the human health due to workplace or nature of work, and this term
also includes the possible risk likely to occur upon the health workers at the
time of health treatment as well.
(g) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed o r as prescribed in the rule s
framed under this Act.
(h) "Traditional treatment provider" means a person providing treatment
traditionally through herbs, Jantav and minerals.
(i) "Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal responsible for
matters relating to health and population of the Government of Nepal.
(j) "Committee" means the National Public Health Committee referred to in

Section 50.
(k) "Government health institution" means the health institution operated by the
Federal, Provincial and Local Levels.
(l) "Community health worker" means a health worker as well as a woman health
volunteer working in the institution or community after having prescribed
qualification or training from the recognized institute on the subject of health
service.
(m) "Service recipient" means the person receiving health service in a health
institution.
(n) "Service provider" means a physician, health worker and community health
worker working in a health institution after achieving certain qua lification or
training on the subject of health service from a recognized health institute.
(o) "Health worker" means a person registered in the concerned Council as a health
worker under the prevailing law.
(p) "Health service" means retributive, promotio nal, diagnostic, remedial,
rehabilitative and palliative service provided , based on modern treatment
(allopathy), Ayurved, homeopathy, Unani, natural treatment, acupuncture,
Sowarigpa (Amchi) treatment system.
(q) "Health institution" means a government health institution, and this term also
includes a non-governmental or private , or cooperative or non-profit-making
community health institution established under the prevailing law.

Chapter-2
Rights, Duties of Service Recipients and Responsibilities of Health Institutions
3. Access to and certainty of health service: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to
obtain quality health service in an easy and convenient manner.
(2) For the purposes of getting the service referred to in sub-section (1), it shall
be the duty of every citizen to be involved in the programs relating to health as
prescribed by the Government of Nepal, from time to time, under the prevailing law.
(3) No citizen shall be deprived of health service.
(4) Every citizen shall have the right to obtain free basic health services under
the following headings, as prescribed:
(a) Vaccination service,
(b) Motherhood, infant and pediatric health service such as integrated infant
and pediatric disease management, nutrition service, pregnan cy, labor
and child birth service, family planning, a bortion and reproductive
health,
(c) Service relating to communicable disease,
(d) Service relating to non-communicable disease and physical disability,
(e) Service relating to mental disease,
(f) Service relating to elderly citizen's health,
(g) Service of general emergency condition,
(h) Health promotion service,
(i) Ayurveda and other accredited alternative health service,
(j) Other services prescribed by the Government of Nepal by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette.
(5) The Provincial and Local Governments may make necessary addition to the
basic health services determined by the Government of Nepal pursuant to sub-section
(6) The concerned government shall bear the burden of financial expenses of
the services added under sub-section (5).
(7) Other provisions and processes relating to detailed descriptions, service flow
and management of the services referred to in sub-section (4) shall be as prescribed by
the Ministry.
(8) The Local Level may provide the basic health service in partnership with
any health institutions operated under the Province and the Federation.
4. Emergency treatment: (1) Every health institution shall provide emergency health
service as prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of each health institution and health worker to provide
health service referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if emergency health
service is not available in any health institution, such health institution, after providing
treatment available at such an institution, shall refer to another health institution for
additional treatment.
(4) The expenses of treatment under this Section shall be borne by health
insurance if it has been made, and by the person concerned, his or her guardian, family
member, patron or the person who has accepted patronage if health insurance has not
been in effect or the amount of health insurance is not sufficient to cover the expenses.
Provided that the health institution shall provide the health service under the
basic health service without charge.
(5) While providing emergency health service under this Section, the concerned
service recipient shall be required to adopt the process to be fulfilled for obtaining such
service only after starting the treatment.
(6) Other provisions relating to emergency treatment service shall be as
prescribed.
5. Specialist service: (1) The Government of Nepal shall provide specialized services
prescribed as necessary on the basis of nature of service, geographical condition and
the rate of epidemic of the disease.
(2) The Provincial Government shall provide specialist's service as per the
standards prescribed by the Federal law.
(3) Other matters relating to the provision of the specialist's services shall be as
prescribed.
6. Referral service: (1) Every health institution shall, after providing service available in
its institution, if there is no possibility to provide further treatment to the patient who
comes for treatment due to the structure, equipment of its health institution , lack of
specialist's service or any other appropriate cause, refer immediately to the health
institution that can provide additional treatment to such a patient.
(2) While referring pursuant to Sub-section (1), the health institution shall fulfill
the methods and procedures as prescribed.
(3) After establishing necessary referral system among health institutions that
provide specialist's service and basic health service, the Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government and Local Level shall make necessary arrangement to make the
service effective.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, while
referring the patient undergoing emergency treatment, referral shall be made by the
referrer health institution, along with minimum equipment and available health facility
available with it.
7. To provide quality health service: (1) The Government of Nepal shall make
arrangement for providing every citizen with quality health service from a health
institution.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall, i n order to provide the citizen with health
service based on available resources and means, perform the following functions:
(a) To determine policy for the protection and promotion of the health of
citizens,
(b) To provide service i n an egalitarian manner by determining priority of
health service.
(3) The Federation, Province and Local Level shall, in order to implement this
Act, make arrangement for human resources, technology and equipment in such
institution on the basis of necessity after establishing health institution that have
fulfilled the prescribed standards.
8. Duties of service recipient: The duties of the service recipient receiving service from
a health institution or health worker shall be as follows:
(a) To be aware regarding his or her own heal th, adopt healthy life style,
profess yoga and physical exercise and use the service provided by the
health institution,
(b) To comply with the rules of the health institution by the person receiving
health service,
(c) To provide the health institution with actual information related to own
health condition, and to help the health worker in the course of obtaining
health service,
(d) To respect and honor the health worker and health institution,
(e) Not to commit any act that constitutes physical, mental and gender
violence against a health worker,
(f) To sign on treatment or discharge card by mentioning in case of refusal
made to receive partial or full treatment recommended,
(g) To obtain service upon visiting the health institution refer red by the
health institution subject to Section 6.
9. Responsibility for getting treated: If any family member, patron or any person, whose
patronage has been accepted falls ill, the guardian, family mem ber, patron and the
person who has accepted patronage shall have the responsibility to take such a person
to a health institution, get treated, bear treatment expenses and help and facilitate in the
treatment.
10. To provide service recipient with information: (1) Every health institution and health
worker providing treatment shall provide the service recipient with information on the
following matters:
(a) Regarding his or her condition of health and treatment of every service
recipient,
Provided that if there is a sufficient ground that it may be against
the interest of him or her or the community while providing information
of the health of the service recipient, it shall not bar the health institution
from keeping such information as confidential.
(b) Regarding diagnosis of the illness, natural effect of the diagnosed illness
and standards, and alternative of, the service related to treatment,
(c) Regarding estimated expenses and potential result related to alternative
health treatment,
(d) Regarding the refusal of health service likely to be made by the service
recipient, and potential resul t, risk and liability likely to arise while
refusing the service.
(2) While providing the service recipient with information referred to in subsection (1), the health institution shall provide such information in a language he or she
can understand, as far as possible.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), if there is
no condition to provide the information of the service recipient's health condition to the
concerned service recipient, such information shall be provided to the adult member of
his or her family.
11. To obtain informed consent of service recipient: (1) Every health institution shall
obtain informed consent of the service recipient, while providing him or her with health
service.
Explanation: For the purpose s of this Section, the term "informed consent"
means written or oral consent given by a person who is legally competent to obtain
health service.
(2) For the purpose s of sub-section (1), written consent shall be obtained to
provide the prescribed treatment.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and (2), health
service may be provided without informed consent of the service recipient in any of the
following circumstances:
(a) If the service recipient is not in a condition to give consent or has not
given anyone else permission or authority to give such consent, his or
her wife or husband, father or mother, grandfather or grandmother, adult
son or daughter, brother or sister so far as available respectively or
available closest person of the service recipient who has given such
consent.
(b) If the health service has been provided without consent under the
prevailing law or by an order of the court,
(c) If there is a serious threat likely to occur upon public health if any person
is not treated,
(d) If there is a possibility of death of the concerned patient or likely to occur
irreparable damage to his or her health if it is delayed to provide health
service,
(e) If the concerned person has not refused to obtain health service in an
expressed or unexpressed manner or by conduct,
(f) In other cases as prescribed.
12. To behave equally: (1) While carrying out treatment pursuant to this Act, it shall be
the duty of the concerned health worker to behave equally and respectfully towards all
the service recipients.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a health institution
may prioritize on the basis of the seriousness of the health of the patient while carrying
out treatment.
(3) No health institution shall discriminate, or cause to be discriminated, anyone
in the treatment on the basis of his or her origin, religion, race, caste, ethnicity, gender,
occupation, sexual and gender identity, physical or health condition, disability, marital
status, pregnancy, ideology or similar other basis as such.
13. Professional conduct: Health institutions and health workers shall comply with the
professional conduct as determined by the concerned councils.
14. To maintain confidentiality: (1) While providing health service, information
including health condition of the service recipient, diagnosis or treatment obtained by
him or her shall be kept confidential.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prevent the information from being published, in any of
the following circumstances:
(a) If the service recipient gives written consent to publish the information,
(b) If any information is to be published in accordance with the order of the
court or prevailing law,
(c) If it appears to have serious impact in public health if information is not
published.
(3) For the purposes of clause (c) of sub-section (2), it shall be in accordance
with the decision made by the prescribed official regarding whether serious impact is
going to occur in the public health.
15. To provide discharge summary: Each health institution shall provide the patient, who
has undergone treatment upon getting admission to such an institution, with a discharge
summary, along with the information as prescribed, while discharging such a patient.
16. Liability of health institution: (1) Each health institution shall provide health service
from a qualified service provider only.
(2) Each health institution shall adopt necessary safety measures towards not
spreading infection and preventing any disease.
(3) Each health institution shall make arrangement for the transmission of
following information relating to health service provided by it:
(a) Available health service, its nature, estimated time and cost needed,
(b) Work operation table and time schedule of physicians or health workers,
(c) Procedures to establish access to health service,
(d) Procedures relating to complaint management.
17. To provide information to local administration: (1) In case anybody takes a person
to any health institution for the treatment due to accident or any other reason, such a
health institution shall provide such a person with treatment service as immediately
available with it, and if such person is not identified, it shall provide such information
to the concerned local administration.
(2) While providing information pursuant to sub-section (1), the health
institution shall provide information of the person treated and other information related
to him or her as far as available.
(3) After receiving information pursuant to sub-sections (1) and (2), the local
administration shall give information by searching for the family or guardian of the
concerned person.
18. To make a complaint: If additional complication appears in the health of any service
recipient in the course of treatment or if he or she has some doubt in the process of
treatment, he or she may make a complaint as prescribed to the prescribed authority
against the health worker and health institution involved in the treatment.
19. To impose condition and restriction: The chief of the health institution may impose
certain conditions and restrictions in the service to be provided by the health institution
on the basis of health condition of the service provider under the prevailing law.
20. To adopt necessary measures: Each health institution shall, subject to the prevailing
law, adopt necessary measures towards the safety of the employees and preventing
infection and disease.

Chapter-3
Relating to Health System and Management of Service
21. Operation and regulation of health institutions: (1) The provisions relating to levelwise structure of the health institutions and the service s to be provided by such
institutions shall be as prescribed by the Ministry.
(2) Minimum standards relating to health institution s and the services shall be
as determined by the Ministry.
(3) Each health institution shall provide service s subject to the standard s
referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The health institutions established and in operation prior to the
commencement of this Act, shall fulfill the standard prescribed pursuant to sub-section
(2) within the time specified by the Ministry.
(5) The Federal, Provincial and Local Levels may, in order to provide health
service, carry out necessary partnership with private or non -governmental health
institutions.
(6) The Gov ernment of Nepal may determine the standards, license and
regulation of the services to be provided by the private and non-governmental, private
or cooperative, or non-profit-making or community health institutions by a notification
in the Nepal Gazette,
(7) The Federation, concerned Province or Local Level may issue license to
operate any health institution pursuant to the standards determined under sub-section
(8) The provisions relating to issuing license to any health institution referred
to in sub-section (7), and renewal thereof and carrying out monitoring, evaluation and
regulation of such a health institution shall be in accordance with the Provincial and
Local law.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (8), the Provincial and
Local Levels may issue a license, renew and carry out monitoring and regulation of any
health institution under this Act, until the enactment of the Provincial and Local laws.
22. To obtain license: (1) A non-governmental or private health institution shall provide
health service only after obtaining the license as prescribed.
(2) The health institution in operation at the time of the commencement of this
Act without obtaining the license shall obtain the license pursuant to sub-section (1)
within the time prescribed by the Ministry.
(3) In the case of the traditional treatment service, service shall be provided after
obtaining approval pursuant to the standards prescribed by the Local Level.
23. To be ipso facto terminated: The license of a health institution that does not meet the
standards prescribed under Section 21 and operating without obtaining the license
under Section 22 shall be deemed to have been ipso facto terminated.
24. To provide health service from elsewhere except health institution: (1) The Local
Level and Provincial Government may provide school health service in cooperation
with the educational institutions.
(2) The nature and standards of the school health service to be provided pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the Province and Local Level.
(3) Any health institution may conduct specialist's service through mobile
camps by obtaining permission from the prescribed body of the concerned Province.
(4) The process and standard s to be fulfilled while providing mobile health
camp pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be as prescribed by the Provincial Government.
(5) The process and standards to be fulfilled while providing health service from
door to door shall be as prescribed by the Local Level.
25. To maintain quality by health institution: (1) The quality of the service to be
provided by a health institution shall be ensured in accordance with the Federal law.
(2) The Ministry may implement , or cause to be implemented by making
standards of health services.
(3) The prescribed body shall carry out monitoring and evaluation from time to
time as to whether the standards referred to in this Section have been fulfilled or not.
(4) Each health institution shall have the duty to comply with the directives
given by the concerned body after the monitoring and evaluation carried out pursuant
to sub-section (3).
26. Human resource management and development: (1) The Government of Nepal shall
prepare and enforce the policy and standards relating to development, distribution and
use of human resource of the health sector.
(2) While prescribing standard s referred to in sub-section (1), such standards
shall be prescribed on the basis of estimation of human resources , technology and
equipment by analyzing and mapping of long -term, mid-term and immediate
requirements for the development, management and use of human resource.
27. Investigation, regulation, quality measurement and monitoring: (1) The
Government of Nepal and the prescribed body may conduct regulation, inspection,
monitoring, investigation and evaluation as to whether or not the health institution and
service provider have maintained the quality pursuant to the prescribed standards.
(2) If it appears, from the result of the inspection, investigation and monitoring
carried out pursuant to sub-section (1), that public health would be affected due to non
compliance of the set standards by the institution, the body providing approval for the
establishment and operation of the institution may give order that may include even the
closing of such an institution.
(3) The concerned Government shall have the responsibility to close or cause to
be closed such an institution pursuant to the order referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) Appropriate mechanism shall be c onstituted in order to conduct an
investigation, regulation, measurement of quality, monitoring and evaluation.
28. Health finance and social security: (1) A separate health fund shall be set up out of
the amount collected from the tax to be imposed for controlling the production of goods
and activities that affect public health.
(2) The following amount shall be credited to the fund referred to in sub-section
(a) Amount received from the Government of Nepal,
(b) Amount received from the Provincial Government,
(c) Amount received from the Local Level,
(d) Amount received from any non-governmental and private organization
and institution,
(e) Amount received from any foreign organization and institution.
(3) The amount of the fund set up pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be spent in
the areas of public health.
(4) The provision s relating to the operation of fund set up pursuant to subsection (3) shall be as prescribed.
(5) The provision s relating to health insurance of the citizens shall be in
accordance with the prevailing law.
29. Provisions relating to price of medicine, prescription, pharmacy and free
medicine: (1) The physicians and health workers shall , while prescribing a medicine,
write a generic name of the medicine.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , in the case of
qualitative domestic products, act shall be done within two years from the date of the
commencement of this Section so as to make such act consistent with sub-section (1).
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ub-section (1), in the case of a
patent and new medicine, it shall not prevent from recommending with the brand name.
(4) Each government hospital shall ensure regular availability of medicine with
fair price by operating the pharmacy of its own.
(5) Determination of the price of medicine s shall be as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.
(6) Each health institution and service provider shall have to comply with the
standard treatment system so that medicines will be properly used and promoted.
(7) The drug seller shall make necessary arrangement for the storage, sale and
distribution of medicines by maintaining quality of medicines as prescribed.
(8) The d rug seller shall not sell and distribute any medicine without the
prescription of the physician.
(9) Other provisions relating to medicines shall be in accordance with the
prevailing law.
30. Not to provide expenses for foreign treatment: Notwithstanding anything contained
in the prevailing law, if any person is to be treated in a foreign country, the expenses to
be spent on this shall not be made available by the Government of Nepal.
31. To provide extended hospital service: (1) A health institution may provide extended
hospital service as necessary on the basis of available resources, means and human
resources.
(2) Such health institution shall provide the physician s and health worker s
providing service pursuant to sub-section (1) with additional allowances and other
incentives for providing such service.
32. Not allowed to serve elsewhere: (1) Any physician, health worker or the employee
working in a government hospital and health institution shall not serve elsewhere during
the time prescribed by the concerned body.
(2) If any physician, health worker or employee wishes to serve elsewhere
during the time other than the time mentioned in sub-section (1), he or she shall obtain
prior approval of the concerned body.
33. Power to set up emergency health treatment fund: (1) The Ministry and Provincial
Government shall set up an emergency health treatment fund to make arrangements for
bearing the expenses of treatment of the poor and destitute, the person whose house and
address is not traced, the family members of a martyr who sacrificed life in the course
of popular movement, armed struggle and r evolution, the family of the enforced
disappeared person, the warrior of democracy, conflict victim and the displaced, the
disabled, the wounded and the victim, in the case of not being able to bear the expenses
incurred in treatment.
(2) The provisions relating to the operation of the fund referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter-4
Blood, Use of Blood Based Substances and Human Organs Transplant
34. Blood transmission service: (1) Only the institution which has obtained the license
issued by the Ministry shall provide blood transmission service.
(2) By setting up units at different places for providing blood transm ission
service, the institution obtaining the license pursuant to sub-section (1) shall provide
blood transmission service and other related services subject to the license.
(3) While providing the service to the recipient, the institution providing blood
transmission service pursuant to sub-section (1), shall only provide the blood having no
infection of any kind of disease.
(4) Other provisions relating to issuing license and renewal thereof in
accordance with this Section shall be as prescribed.
35. Human organ s transplant and use: The provisions relating to human organ s
transplant shall be in accordance with the prevailing law.
36. To conduct and manage autopsy: (1) The authorized physician shall, i n order to
conduct autopsy under the prevailing law, conduct autopsy as prescribed.
(2) After autopsy, unclaimed dead body may be utilized in the studies of medical
sciences after fulfilling the process prescribed.
37. To manage ambulance and vehicle for corpse: (1) The health institution as prescribed
by the Ministry shall provide the servic e of ambulance and vehi cle for corpse subject
to the standards prescribed.
(2) Other provisions relating to the operation of service of ambulance and
vehicle for corpse shall be as prescribed.
38. Identification of cause of human death: If someone dies while undergoing treatment
in a health institution, examinations shall be held, as prescribed, in order to identify the
cause of the death.

Chapter-5
Social, Cultural and Environmental Determinants for
Protection, Promotion and Improvement of Public Health
39. Quality of consumable goods: (1) The Government of Nepal may, i n order to make
the products, storage, sale and distribution of the consu mable goods including food ,
meat and water , qualitative and fair, prescribe the minimum quality standard s in
accordance with the Federal law.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Province, Local Level and all the concerned to
comply with the standards referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) Other provisions relating to the quality of consumable goods shall be in
accordance with the prevailing law.
40. Noise and air pollution: (1) The Government of Nepal may, for reducing the effect to
the public health by noise , air, water and visibility pollutions, determine standard s
regarding this in accordance with the Federal law.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Province, Local Level , general public,
entrepreneurs, businesspersons, organizat ions and institutions to comply with the
standards referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The Government of Nepal shall, for reducing the effect to the public health
by sound, air, water and visibility pollutions, determine standards as to the noise, air,
water, and visibility pollution in accordance with the Federal law.
41. Sanitation and waste management: (1) The Government of Nepal may , in order to
control or cause to be controlled the adverse effect to the human health by
environmental pollution and waste, make necessary standard s in accordance with the
prevailing Federal law.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make necessary standard s for collecting,
reusing, refining, disposing and regulating the health friendly waste.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Provincial and Local Level to comply with the
standards referred to in sub-section (1) and (2).
(4) Each health institution shall manage the risk-free and risky waste by
separating them pursuant to the prescribed standards.
(5) Each health institution shall provide the service provider s with clean
drinking water pursuant to the prescribed standards.
42. Public health friendly residence, public transport and road infrastructure and
safety: (1) While constructing residence area, the standard s and quality prescribed by
the Federal law shall be maintained for making health friendly.
(2) While constructing ro ad infrastructure s, construction shall be made to
reduce road accidents and considering health promotion. While upgrading the standard
of the newly constructed and old roads, arrangement shall be made for the footpath s,
disabled friendly structures and bicycle lanes at the fixed places in accordance with the
prevailing law.
(3) The Government of Nepal may, while operating the public transport, specify
the necessary standards and implement, or cause to be implemented, such standards in
order to make it environment friendly without adversely affecting the public health.
43. Industry and urbanization: (1) In order to prevent by identifying the adverse effect
likely to occur in the public health and to mitigate risk, public health impact assessment
shall be conducted in the industries, businesses and projects before obtaining approval.
(2) The standards, mechanism and level wise working area of the public health
impact assessment referred to in su b-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the Federal
(3) If adverse effect occurs in the public health as a result of failure to manage
waste properly by any industry, business and project or due to any kind of radiation,
the health treatment for the persons affected by this and in the case of the physical
damage, animal and livestock and other damage occurred, arrangement for its
appropriate compensation shall be made by the industrialist, businessperson and the
project concerned.
(4) The Federal, Provincial and Local Level shall make arrangement for the
promotion of public health friendly urbanization , having sufficient management for
sports, recreation spot, park, walking space, riding bicycle, in consideration of good
health.
(5) While determining the g rant to be obtained by the Local Level under the
prevailing law, the Government of Nepal shall develop and include public health
friendly indicators.
44. Safety of health of workers working in risky zone: (1) For the safety of health of the
workers working in the risky zone, the concerned employer shall adopt safety measures
in accordance with the prevailing law.
(2) The employers shall procure health insurance of employees or staffs working
in risky zone pursuant to Sub-section (1) in accordance with the prevailing law.
(3) If any staff or employee is injured or dead due to the use of tool, equipment
or any other material at the risky workplace referred to in sub-section (1), or if any
health worker is seriously infected or falls ill in the course of providing service , the
concerned employer shall make arrangement s for health treatment and appropriate
compensation.
(4) The health worker, staff or employee working at a risky workplace shall be
provided with the risk allowance by the concerned employer as prescribed by the
Government of Nepal.
45. Advertisement, dissemination and transmission affecting public health: (1) No
advertisement of t he production, distribution, dissemination and transmission of
advertising materials that adversely affect human health, including that of alcohol,
cigarette, tobacco or tobacco-based substances shall be made.
(2) Production, distribution, dissemination and transmission of advertisements
by keeping wrong or misleading information to att ract towards any materials and
services that affect mental and physical health shall be prohibited.
46. Social, cultural superstition s affecting public health: The Federal, Provincial and
Local Level may adopt necessary measures for controlling social and cultural
superstitions that affect adversely in the public health.
47. Special social security and programs for target groups: (1) The Local Level and
Provincial Government shall make necessary arrangements to implement the programs
for special social health security for the women, children, adolescents, Dalits, martyrs'
families, and other targeted groups as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) Other provisions relating to health services, facilities to be provided for the
targeted groups pursuant to sub-section (1) and the process thereto shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-6
Emergency Health Service and Management
48. Emergency health service and management: (1) There shall be a rapid response team
and emergency physicians' group as prescribed in order to extend health service
immediately during emergency circumstances.
(2) The Federal, Provincial and Local Level shall develop emergency health
plan and enforce it.
(3) While developing the plan referred to in s ub-section (2 ), the F ederal,
Provincial and Local Level shall develop it in consonance with the standard s and
directives determined by the Government of Nepal under the Federal law.
(4) The Local Level may declare a state of public health emergency in
accordance with the prevailing law.
Provided that, if any disaster occurs in more than one Local Level , the
concerned Province, and if the public health disaster occurs in more than one Province,
the Government of Nepal may declare state of public health emergency as prescribed.
(5) The information relating to the declaration of state of public health
emergency shall be disseminated and transmitted by public me dium for all the
concerned.
(6) The period and zone of public health emergency including other aspects may
be added or reduced or removed on the basis of available data and information.
(7) Other provision s relating to the emergency state of health shall be as
prescribed.
49. Prevention, information and treatment of infectious disease: (1) The list of
infectious diseases shall be as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) If highly hazardous infectious disease outbreaks at any place, it shall be the
duty of the concerned person to provide the health institution or public health official
with its information.
(3) If any person is found to have been affected with infectious disease,
management of his or her treatment shall be immediately made by the concerned health
institution or health worker.
(4) If patients are identified with the listed infectious disease s, the concerned
health institution or the health worker shall transmit the information to the concerned
body within the period as prescribed pursuant to the standards prescribed.
(5) The concerned Local Level shall have t he responsibility for conducting
additional studies and management on time, on the basis of the information received
pursuant to sub-section (4), upon obtaining necessary support from the Province and
the Ministry, as prescribed.
(6) A health institution shall make necessary arrangements for the treatment of
the patient with infectious disease.
(7) Other provisions relating to the prevention of infectious diseases shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-7
National Public Health Committee
50. National Public Health Committee: (1) For addressing comprehensive social
determinants of health affecting human health, making policy-wise recommendation on
inclusion of the issues of public health into the policy and programs of thematic scope,
there shall be formed a National Public Health Committee.
(2) The formation of the Committee shall be as follows:
(a) Minister, Ministry of the Government of Nepal
responsible for the matters relating to health -Chairperson
(b) State Minister/Assistant Minister, Ministry
of the Government of Nepal responsible for
the matters relating to health -Member
(c) Member, National Planning Commission
(responsible the matters relating to health) -Member
(d) One person nominated by the Government of
Nepal from among the Vice-chancellors of
Academies of Health and Sciences -Member
(e) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal looking after the matters relating to
industries -Member
(f) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to finance -Member
(g) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
agriculture -Member
(h) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal looking responsible for the matters relating to
drinking water and sanitation -Member
(i) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
home affairs -Member
(j) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
physical infrastructures and transport -Member
(k) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
women, children and elderly citizens -Member
(l) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
forest and environment -Member
(m) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
education -Member
(n) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating to
labor, employment and social security -Member
(o) Secretary, Ministry of the Government of
Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to health -Member
(p) Chief Specialist, Ministry of the Government
of Nepal responsible for the matters relating
to health -Member
(q) One Chairperson nominated from
among the Councils related to health -Member
(r) One person nominated by the Chairperson
from among health experts -Member
(s) Two persons including one woman nominated
by the Chairperson from among the directors of
private health institutions -Member
(t) One person nominated by the Chairperson from
among the office bearers of the organizations/
institutions related to the consumers' welfare
protection -Member
(u) Chief, Policy, Planning and Monitoring Division,
Ministry of the Government of Nepal responsible
for the matters relating to health and population -Member-Secretary
(3) The term of office of the members nominated pursuant to clauses (d), (q),
(r) (s) and (t) of sub-section (2) shall be three years.
(4) The committee may invite other experts to the meeting as necessary.
(5) The meeting of the committee shall be convened at least twice a year.
(6) The Policy, Planning and Monitoring Division of the Ministry of the
Government of Nepal responsible for the matters relating to health and population shall
carry out the work of Secretariat for performance of the day to day business of the
committee.
(7) The procedures of the c ommittee shall be as determined by the committee
itself.
51. Functions, duties and powers of the committee: (1) The functions, duties and powers
of the committee shall be as follows:
(a) To guide, monitor and make policy suitable to the concept of the multisector dimens ions of health relating to safety, protection and
improvement of the health of citizen,
(b) To adopt, or cause to be adopted, the health policy in all other policies
to address comprehensive social determinants of health,
(c) To determine multi -sector and priority based goal on proportional
distribution in the service sector of health,
(d) To manage effective coordination in the service provision of health,
(e) To cooperate, coordinate and monitor to apply internationa l policy,
strategy and commitment related to public health in the national interest
of Nepal,
(f) To make recommendation to the Government of Nepal to control
pesticides being used for various purposes, and to make necessary policy
to mitigate road and vehicular accidents and prepare standards related to
business health,
(g) To make necessary recommendation to make provisions for the public
health workers to promote the primary treatment and health education at
schools of the Local Level,
(h) To perform such other functions as assigned by the Government of
Nepal,
(2) The committee may form sub-committees as necessary.

Chapter-8
Offences and Punishment
52. Offence: If any person commits any o f the following acts, such a person shall be
deemed to have committed the offence under this Act:
(a) To operate a health institution without obtaining the license pursuant to

Section 22, and to operate blood transmission service without obtaining
the license pursuant to Section 34.
(b) To refuse to provide health treatment service,
(c) To treat the persons having mental health problem by committing the
acts such as keeping them tied up or detaining in a cell,
(d) To make refusal by a health institution t o provide basic health service
and emergency treatment available at the health institution,
(e) To provide treatment service without obtaining the informed consent
pursuant to Section 11,
(f) Not to extend equal behavior to the service recipients in accordance with

Section 12,
(g) Not to maintain confidentiality pursuant to Section 14,
(h) To make obstruction and disturbance to prevent the health worker or
health institution from fulfilling the duty under this Act,
(i) Not to provide an information by the concerned person to the health
worker or health institution of the notice or information pursuant to this
(j) To provide health worker or service provider deliberately with the false
information,
(k) To pretend being another person in order to deceive the health worker
or health institution,
(l) Not to comply with this Act and the rule s, standard s, directives and
procedure made under this Act,
(m) To have adverse impact in public health due to the quality of food, water
and air pursuant to Sections 39 and 40,
(n) To make an advertisement contrary to Section 45,
(o) To collect human biological sample and tak e it outside the country
without obtaining the approval in accordance with the prevailing law,
(p) To do any other act contrary to this Act, and the Rules, standard s,
directives and procedures made under this Act.
53. Punishment: Punishment shall be imposed as follows for the offence referred to in

Section 52:
(a) If the offence referred to in clauses (a) and (o) is committed, a fine of
one million rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years
or both,
(b) If the offence referred to in clauses (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k),
(l), (m) and (p) is committed, a fine from twenty -five thousand up to
fifty thousand rupees,
(c) If the offence referred to in clause (c) is committed, fine up to fifty
thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or
both,
(d) If the offence referred to in clause (n) is committed, a fine of ten
thousand rupees is to be imposed on the person who broadcasts the
advertisement.
54. Investigating authority: The authority to carry out investig ation and i nquiry of the
case deemed to be an offence under this Act shall be vested in the official designated
by the Government of Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
55. Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall be the plaintiff
of the cases under this Act.
56. Authority to adjudicate cases and hear appeals: (1) The District Court shall have the
power to originally adjudicate the case deemed to be an offence under this Act.
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the decision made by the District Court
pursuant to sub-section (1) may file an appeal in the High Court.
57. Compensation: (1) If the offence is held to have been c ommitted under this Act, the
adjudicating authority shall make an order to get appropriate compensation paid from
the offender for the actual damage and loss caused to the affected party.
(2) Other provisions relating to the recovery of compensation shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter-9
Miscellaneous
58. To obtain approval of Ministry: (1) Approval of the Ministry shall be obtained in
order to collect the human biological sample and before taking such sample outside the
country.
(2) The Ministry may , for the purpose of sub -section (1), make and apply
necessary standards and procedures.
59. To maintain records: It shall be the duty of the chief of the concerned health institution
to make arrangement to safely maintain the record s of every service recipient, as
prescribed, who receives service from the health institution.
60. To submit report: (1) Each health institution shall submit the report to the body that
issues the license every year as prescribed, by including the details of the service
provided by it.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the concerned
Province and Local Levels shall forward the integrated report of the services provided
by the health institutions in operation upon obtaining the license from the Province and
Local Levels, on the basis of the report received from the health institutions pursuant
to sub-section (1) to the Ministry.
(3) While forwarding the report pursuant to sub-section (2), the details of the
programs relating to public health conducted by the Province and Local Levels, under
the prevailing the, shall also be included.
(4) The Ministry may issue directives as necessary on the basis of the report
received pursuant to sub-section (2).
61. To be in accordance with prevailing law: The matters contained in this Act shall be
governed by this Act and the matters not contained in this Act shall be in accordance
with the prevailing law.
62. Delegation of authority: The authorized official may delegate some of the power s
conferred to him or her pursuant to this Act to any official as per necessity.
63. Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in order
to implement this Act.
64. Power to make standards, directives or procedures: The Ministry may make
necessary standards, directives or procedures subject to this Act or the rule s framed
under this Act.