The Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer Act, 2019 (2075)
Date of Authentication
March 27, 2019 (2075.12.13 )
Act No. 34 of the year 2075 (2018/19)
An Act Made to Amend and Consolidate Laws Relating to Foreign Investment and
Technology Transfer
Preamble: Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the prevailing Nepal laws
relating to foreign investment and technology transfer in order to make national economy
competiti ve, strong and employment -oriented through mobilization to the maximum
extent of the available means and resources for economic prosperity of the country , and
to achieve sustainable economic growth through industrialization while creating
investment friend ly environment t o attract foreign capital, technology and investment in
the sectors of import substitution, export promotion , through increase in productivity , and
of infrastructure development and production of goods or services;
Now, therefore, be it ena cted by the Federal Parliament.
1. Short Title and C ommencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Foreign
Investment and Technology Transfer Act, 2019 (2075) ."
(2) Sections 10 and 11 of t his Act shall commence on such a date as
appointed by the Government of Nepal by a notificatio n in the Nepal Gazette, and
other Sections shall commence forthwith.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act ,-
(a) "Industry" means any industry established in accordance with the
prevailing law relating to i ndustrial enterprises.
(b) “One Stop Service Center” means the One Stop Service Center
established in accordance with the prevailing law relating to
industrial enterprises.
(c) “Non-resident Nepali” means a person holding the non -resident
Nepali identity card in accordance with the prevailing law relating
to non -resident Nepali s.
(d) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the Rules framed under this Act.
(e) “Securities Board” means the Securities Board of Nepal established
in accordance with the prevailing law relating to securities.
(f) "Technology transfer" means any transfer of technology to be made
under an agreement between an industry and a fore ign investor on
the following matters:
(1) Patent, design, trademark, goodwill, technological
specificity , formula, process,
(2) User’s license, technological know -how sharing or use of
technological knowledge (franchise),
(3) Provision of foreign technic al adviser, management and
marketing service or other technological skill or knowledge.
(g) “Board” means the Industry and Investment Promotion Board
referred to in the prevailing law relating to industrial enterprises.
(h) "Ministry" means the Ministry of Industries, Commerce and
Supplies
(i) “Investment Board” means the Investment Board referred to in the
prevailing law relating to the Investment Board.
(j) "Foreign investment" means the following investment made by a
foreign investor in an industry or company:
(1) Share investment in foreign currency ,
(2) Re-investment in an industry of dividends derived from
foreign currency or shares,
(3) Lease finance made in accordance with Section 6,
(4) Investment made in venture capital fund in accordance with

Section 9,
(5) Investment made in listed securities through secondary
securities market in accordance with Section 10,
(6) Investment made by purchas ing shares or assets of a
company incorporated in Nepal,
(7) Investment received through the banking channel after
issuing securities in a foreign capital market by an industry
or company incorporated in Nepal in accordance with

Section 11,
(8) Investment made through technology transfer, or
(9) Investment maintained by establishing and expanding an
indus try in Nepal.
(k) "Foreign investor" means any foreign individual , firm, company ,
Non-resident Nepali or foreign government or international agency
or other corporate body of similar nature that makes foreign
investment , and also includes, in the case of a foreign investor that
is an institutional foreign investor, the ultimate beneficiary of such
an institution.
(l) “Foreign investment approving body ” means the body referred to in

Section 17.
(m) “Department” means the Department of Industries.
(n) “Institutional foreign investor” means a foreign company, corporate
body or international institution that makes foreign investment.

Chapter -2
Foreign Investment
3. Foreign investment may be made: (1) A foreign investor may make foreign
investment in any industry and derive gains from such investment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), no industry
operated with foreign investment may make foreign investment of profits earned
or in any other manner , in any indust ry referr ed to in the Schedule.
Provided that technology transfer may, with the approval of the
Department, be made in an industry referr ed to in the Schedule which is
established with Nepali investment.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), approval
shall not be given for making foreign investment in any industry of an amount that
is less than the amount specified by the Government of Nepal by a notification in
the Nepal Gazette.
4. Foreign investment may be made individually or jointly: A foreign investor
may make foreign investment individually or jointly or by establishing an industry
jointly with an industry established in Nepal or a Nepali citizen.
5. Foreign investment may be made by purchasing assets or shares of
industry: A foreign investor may make foreign investment by purchasing the
assets of or shares not exceeding the prescribed percent of any industry established
in Nepal.
6. Lease investment may be made: A foreign investor may make foreign
investment, subje ct to the prescribed ceiling, in any aircraft, ship, machinery and
equipment, construction equipment or similar other equipment.
7. Investment may be made through technology transfer: (1) A foreign investor
may make foreign investment by making technology transfer in any industry
established in Nepal.
(2) The terms of technology transfer to be made pursuant to sub -section
(1) shall be as specified in the technology transfer agreement entered into between
the con cerned industry and the foreign investor.
(3) The agreement referred to in sub-section (2) may not provide for the
repatriation of royalty in excess of the prescribed ceiling .
(4) The agreement referred to in sub -section (2) has to be g ot approved
by the foreign investment approving body.
(5) The foreign investment approving body may, in giving approval
pursuant to sub -section (4), specify the necessary terms on the basis inter alia of
international practices on foreign investment and production and selling capacity
of the industry.
8. Foreign investment may be made by establishing a branch : (1) Any industry
incorporated in a foreign country may make foreign investment by establishing or
expanding its br anch industry in Nepal , subject to the prevailing law .
(2) Other provisions relating to es tablishment or expansion of a branch
of the industry p ursuant to sub-section (1) shall be a s prescribed .
9. Foreign investment may be made by establishing venture capital fund : An
institutional foreign investor may, for the purpose of investin g equity in any
industry , establish a venture capital fund by incorporating a company in
accordance with the prevailing law , and by obtaining approval of the Securities
Board.
(2) An a pproval shall have to be obtained by fulfilling the procedures
referred to in Sect ion 15 for the investment in an industry from the fund referred
to in sub -section (1).
(3) Such a company shall provide the statements of the venture capital
fund referred to in sub -section (1) to the Department in every six months .
(4) Other provisions re lating to the fund established p ursuant to sub -
section (1) shall be as prescribed.
10. Trading in securities may be made: (1) An institutional foreign investor
establishing a venture capita l fund pursuant to Section 9 shall have to be registered
in the Securities Board for trading in securities.
(2) The foreign investor registered in the Securit ies Board pursuant to
sub-section (1) may, through the secondary securities market, trade in securities
of an industry in which foreign investment may be made pursuant to this Act.
(3) In carrying on trading in securit ies pursuant to sub-section (2), the
minimum number of securities to be purchase d, the ceiling of investment ,
minimum period for which it has to held the securities after the purchase , reserve
fund to be held in foreign currency for purchasing securit ies and other provisions
related thereto shall be as prescribed.
11. Loan may be borrowed or foreign currency acquired by issuing securit ies: (1)
Any public limited company incorporated in Nepal or a corporate body authorised
under the prevailing law to issue securities may, with the approval of the Nepal
Rastra Bank and the Securities Board, borrow a loan or acquire foreign currency
by issuing bonds, debentures or other securities in the capital market of a fore ign
country .
(2) A company which is i ncorporated with foreign investment in Nepal
may, subject to the prevailing law relating to securities , borrow a loan by issuing
securities within Nepal .
(3) A loan borrowed or foreign currency acquired by issuing securities
pursuant to sub -sections (1) and (2) shall have to be invested in Nepal .
(4) Other provisions relating to the issuance of securities referred to in
this Section shall be in accordance with the prevailing law relating to securit ies.
12. Loan may be borrowed from foreign financial institution : Any industry having
foreign investment may on the re commendation of the Ministry and with the
approval of the Nepal Rastra Bank, in accordance with the prevailing law, borrow
a project loan from , or a loan by entering into a project financing agreement with,
any foreign financial institution.
13. Maximum Ceiling threshold of foreign investment not to be prescribed: (1)
No maximum ceiling of the amount to be invested and the share of investment by
a foreign investor wishing to make investment in Nepal shall be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), in the case
of service industry , the maximum ceiling of equity foreign investment and ceiling
of investment to be made in securities pursuant to Section 10 may be so prescribed
as not to be lesser than the commitment made by Nepal in respect of the concerned
sector or sub -sector at the time of obtaining membership of the World Trade
Organisation.
14. Agreement may be made with commercial bank: (1) A foreign investor making
investment pursuant to this Act may, for purposes of business related to its
investment made in Nepal, execute a tripartite agreement (escrow -agreement) with
its partner investor or other foreign investor and any such commercial bank or
infrastructure development bank as recognized by the Nepal Rastra Bank.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section, the term “escrow
agreement” means an agreement by which the contracting parties agree to the
effect that any amount, documentary evidence shall be handed over to any third
party for the security of transaction between them or as a security for any
guarantee, and s uch amount, documentary evidence or guarantee shall be provided
to the concerned party after the completion of contractual obligations by the
contracting parties.
(2) A bank executing an escrow agreement pursuant to sub -section (1)
shall act as an agent of the parties to the agreement.
(3) Other provisions relating to an escrow agreement to be made
pursuant to sub -section (1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter -3
Approval and Repatriation of Foreign Investment
15. Application to be made for approval to make foreign investment: (1) A foreign
investor wishing to make foreign investment shall have make an application,
setting out the details , accompanied by a time schedule for bringing foreign
investment into Nepal and action plan on investment in the industry, to the Foreign
Investment Approving Body for approval , to make foreign investment, in such a
form and setting out such details as prescribed.
(2) If, in examining an application received pursuant to sub -section (1),
it appears that such documents as pre scribed have been completed, the Foreign
Investment Approving Body shall give approval for foreign investment in such a
form as prescribed within period of seven days of the date of receipt of the
application.
(3) An industry which has obtained approval pursuant to sub -section (2)
wishes to make investment from the eared profits in the same industry or in any
industry other than that referred to the Schedule, it is not necessary for it to reobtain approval on foreign investment.
Provided that the natter requiring license or permission under the prevailing
law for the purpose of registration of an industry or company or tax or any other
business shall be governed accordingly.
(4) If any industry is established or the structure of ownership of any
industry is changed because of foreign investment, in accordance with sub -section
(3), such an industry shall give information thereof to the Department and the
Nepal Rastra Bank. On receipt of such information, the Department shall maintain
records thereof.
(5) If, in examining the application pursuant to sub -section (2), it
appears that approval cannot be given, the Foreign Investment Approving Body
shall give information thereof in writing, setting out the ground and reason
therefor, to the applicant with in a period of seven days.
(6) If, upon receipt of information in accordance with sub -section (5),
the concerned investor is not satisfied with the decision made by the Department,
such an investor may make an application to the Ministry for the review of the
decision.
(7) The Ministry shall, upon making necessary examination of the
application received pursuant to sub -section (6) , make a decision thereon within a
period of thirty days.
16. To give information to the Nepal Rastra Bank : (1) Upon obtaining the approval
for foreign investment in accordance with Section 15 , the foreign investor shall
give information in writing , along with the self -declaration to the effect that the
amount of such investment has been earned from any legitimate source , to the
Nepal Rastra Bank. A fter giving such information , the foreign investor may bring
the amount of such investment into Nepal .
(2) A foreign investor shall bring the amount to be invested in
convertible foreign currency through the banking system upon completio n of such
procedures as determined by the Nepal Rastra Bank .
Provided that an Indian investor may also make investment of such amount
in Indian cur rency through the banking channel .
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), lease
investment referred to in Section 6 and loan investment made by issuing securities
referred to in Section 11 shall be as prescribed.
17. Foreign Investment Approving Body: (1) T he Department shall approv e the
foreign investment not exceeding six billion Rupees.
(2) The Investment Board under the Investment Board Act, 2011 (2068)
shall approve the foreign investment exceeding six billion Rupees.
18. Period within which investment has to be made : (1) A foreign investor shall
have to make investment of the amount in relation to which approval has been
obtained for foreign investment p ursuant to sub -section (2) of Section 15 within
such period as prescribed .
(2) A foreign investor which has already obtained approval for making
foreign investment in accordance with the prevailing law , at the time of the
commencement of this Act, shall also make investment of the prescribed minimum
amount with the period prescribed pursuant to sub-section (1).
(3) The approval giving body may revoke the investment approval
given to an industry that fails to make investment within the period referred to in
sub-section (1) or (2) or Section 43 , except in case of reasonable grounds.
19. To give information o n sale of or transfer of title to shares: (1) In the case of
sale of, or transfer of title to, or otherwise change in the ownership or vested
ownership of, the property, assets or shares or any other kind of financial
equipment generated in Nepal from forei gn investment, whether effected within
or outside Nepal, the concerned company shall, not later than thirty days of the
effect of transaction, give information thereof, along with the relevant
documentary evidence, to the body giving approval for making su ch investment
and have the same recorded as prescribed.
(2) In the case of change in the ownership of the industry subject to
foreign investment in Nepal as a result of the transfer of title to any property,
assets, shares or any other financial equipment of any holding company, the
concerned branch industry or unit of the industry shall have the liability to give
information referred to in sub -section (1).
(3) In the case of a transaction in accordance with sub -section (1), it
shall not be recorded pursuan t to sub -section (1) until tax is paid by the concerned
industry, upon setting out the amount of transaction, in accordance with the
prevailing law.
(4) Other provisions relating to the sale of and transfer of title to shares
shall be as prescribed.
20. Repatriation of investment and earnings: (1) A foreign investor may, if it so
wishes, repatriate its investment from Nepal by selling wholly or partly of the
shares or industry having its investment in accordance with the prevailing Nepal
law, after paying a ll such taxes as may be leviable in accordance with the
prevailing Nepal law.
(2) A foreign investor may repatriate the following amount in the same
foreign currency in which the investment has been made or other convertible
foreign currency with the app roval of the Nepal Rastra Bank , after paying the tax
related liabilities under the prevailing law:
(a) Amount received from the sale of shares with foreign
investment,
(b) Amount of profit or dividend received from foreign
investment,
(c) In the case of li quidation or winding up of the industry or
company, amount remaining after paying all liabilities
following the liquidation or winding up,
(d) Amount of r oyalty received under the technology transfer
agreement,
Provided, however, that in the case of the ro yalty or
fee for the use of a trademark under the transfer of
technology in a liquor industry other that a liquor industry
exporting cent percent of liquor, the amount of such royalty
shall not exceed five percent of the total selling price , as
prescribed, excluding the prevailing tax.
(e) Amount of lease rent under the lease investment,
(f) Amount received as damages or compensation, if any,
received from the final settlement of a law suit , arbitration or
any other legal process in Nepal,
(g) Amount that can be repatriated in accordance with the
prevailing law.
(3) In repatriating amount in a convertible foreign currency in
accordance with sub -section (1) or (2), it shall be repatriated by making conversion
at the prevailing exchange rate.
(4) Where any foreign investor has lent a loan to any industry or
company against the pledge or mortgage of a movable or immovable property
situated in Nepal and the movable or immovable p roperty pledged or mortgaged
required to be auctioned or forfeited because of n onrepayment of the principal or
interest of such a loan, the institution lending such a loan may repatriate the
principal and interest of the loan by auction of such property as if it were a bank
or financial institution of Nepal.
(5) In the case of termi nation of a lease agreement because of non -
payment in accordance with the lease agreement or breach of its terms, the foreign
investor may repatriate its investment and the property invested in the lease.
(6) A foreign investor who wishes to repatriate the foreign investment
or amount earned therefrom in accordance with this Section shall make an
application , in the form as prescribed , to the foreign investment approving body
for approval to that effect .
Provided , that s uch an application shall be made to the Single Stop Service
Centre, if the Government of Nepal , by a notification in the Nepal Gazette gran ts
to the Single Stop Service Centre, the power to the body to give approval relating
to repatriation of foreign investment or amount earned therefrom.
(7) If, in examining an application received p ursuant to sub-section (6),
it appears that the foreign investor has fulfilled the terms and liabilities referred to
in this Act, prevailing law and the agreement made in relation to foreign
investment , the foreign investment approving body shall give approval to
repatriate the foreign investment or amount earned therefrom not later than fifteen
days of the date of receipt of the ap plication .
(8) After obtaining the approval p ursuant to sub-section (7), the foreign
investor may make an application to the Nepal Rastra Bank for the foreign
currency exchange facility .
(9) The Nepal Rastra Bank shall, upon receipt of an application in
accordance with sub -section (8), provide the exchange facility to the foreign
investor for the repatriat ion of foreign investment.
(10) Where the amount of investment is to repatriated by selling wholly
or partly any industry with foreign investment or upon revoc ation of the
registration of the industry or company for any reason , repatriation of the
remaining amount may be made only after the payment or settlement of all
liabilities including the tax payable by such an industry.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section , a
foreign investor may, in repatriating foreign investment made in any industry in
accordance with this Act or profit earned therefrom, repatriate such investment or
profit only to the extent of the ratio of the portion of its investment in the
concerned company.
(12) If any foreign investor i s not satisfied with a decision made by the
body giving such approval in the course of repatriation of the amount of its
investment , the investor may make an application to the Ministry . The Ministry
shall make a decision on such an application within thirty working days .

Chapter -4
Promotion , Facilitation and Regulation of Foreign Investment
21. Functions , duties and powers of the Board: In addition to its functions , duties
and powers referred to, elsewhere in this Act, other functions , duties and powers
of the Board shall be as follows :
(a) To give suggestions to the Government of Nepal for such policy,
institutional and procedural reforms as may be required to be made
for the attraction of foreign investment in industrial and
infrastructure development,
(b) To set such strategies and programs as may be required for the
enhancement of attraction of foreign investment in Nepal and
promotion and protection thereof,
(c) To give approval for the establishment of industries and
infrastructures with foreign investment, and promote foreign
investment,
(d) To facilitate for foreign investment by enhancing, expanding and
protecting foreign investment ,
(e) To make coordination at the policy and implementation levels of
foreign investment,
(f) To assist in the implementation of policies and laws relating to
foreign investment,
(g) To make arrangements for the provision of services to foreign
investors f rom the Single Stop Service Centre,
(h) To obtain information as to whether activities of giving approval for
foreign investment and delivery of services have been carried out
properly, and give necessary direction to the concerned body,
(i) To make facili tation , if there arises any problem in respect of the
repatriation of foreign investment or amount earned, as referred to
in Section 20 or implementation of this Act or the rules framed
under this Act, in that respect ,
(j) To perform , or cause to be performed , such other functions as
prescribed.
22. Functions , duties and powers of the Department : In addition to the functions ,
duties and powers referred to, elsewhere in this Act, other functions , duties and
powers of the Department shall be as follows:
(a) To create conducive environment for the establishment and
operation of industries to be established with foreign investment ,
(b) To facilitate foreign investors to obtain any approval or permission
including initial environmental assessment , environmental impact
assessment in accordance with the prevailing law ,
(c) To maintain updated records of foreign investments approved or
permitted in accordance with this Act or the prevailing law and of
the technology transferred in Nepal , update such records and make
the same public periodic ally,
(d) To give approval for f oreign investor s, and foreigner experts ,
technicians or managerial employees who are engaged in the
industries with foreign investment p ursuant to Section 27 to
repatriate investment and remuneration ,
(e) To make and enforce Standard Operating P rocedures in order to
make foreign investment transparent and to make procedural
simplification ,
(f) To make recommendation for visas to the foreign investors and their
authorised representatives, and foreign experts, technical or
managerial employees engaged in industries with foreign
investment in accordance with Section 27 and minor members of
their family , and make facilitation for that purpose.
(g) To make regular supervision and monitoring as to whether any
industry with foreign investment has misused any facility granted in
accordance with this Act,
(h) To facilitat e industries with foreign investment in establish ing
industries in an industrial zone or special economic zone ,
(i) To perform , or cause to be performed, such other functions as
prescribed.
23. Services to be provided through the Single Stop Service Centre: (1) T he
Government of Nepal may make necessary arrangement so that exemptions ,
facilit ies, concessions or services to be provided to the foreign investors in
accordance with this Act and other prevailing law are provided through the Single
Stop Service Centre.
(2) In manag ing the services to be provided through the Single Stop
Service Centre pursuant to sub-section (1), necessary provision shall be made so
that the following services are provided gradually:
(a) Registration and administration of industr ies,
(b) Approval of foreign investment and loan ,
(c) Registration and administration of c ompanies,
(d) Labour permit ,
(e) Visa facility ,
(f) Testing and control of quality of goods produced by
industr ies,
(g) Approval of environmental study report ,
(h) Energy and infrastructure development , and necessary
coordination for that purpose , as well as f ocal point among
other bodies ,
(i) Exemptions , facilities to which industries are entitled,
(j) Provision of permanent account number ,
(k) Foreign exchange approval ,
(l) Any service related to s uch other function s as may be
required to be performed for industr ies in accordance with
this Act and the R egulation fr amed under this Act.
(3) It may be so prescribed that the S ingle Stop Service Centre may
provide other services referred to in the prevailing law , in addition to the services ,
facilities to be provided pursuant to this Section.

Chapter -5
Exemptions, Facilities and Concessions to be Provided to Industries with Foreign
Investment or Foreign Investors
24. Facilities to be obtained by industries: (1) In addition to the exemptions,
facilities, concessions or protection referred to in this Act, be provided to any
industry with foreign investment, s uch exemptions, facilities or concessions as
may be available under the prevailing Industrial Enterprises Act and
other prevailing law shall.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), such
facilities to which a sick industr y is entitled in accordance with the prevailing law
shall not be available to any industr y with foreign investment.
25. Facility to deal with foreign currency : (1) A foreign investor or industry with
foreign investment may open an account in Nepali currency with any commercial
bank, infrastructure development bank or financial institution of Nepal and in
foreign currency wi th any bank or financial institution licence d to deal with
convertible foreign currency in accordance with the prevailing law and carry on
transaction accordingly.
Provided , however, that approval of the Nepal Rastra Bank shall be
obtained to carry on tran saction by opening an account in convertible foreign
currency .
(2) An industry with foreign investment may, in order to mitigate the
foreign currency exchange fluctuation risk , use an y approved derivative s
equipment through a bank or financial institution.
26. Facilit y of foreign currency : (1) A n industry w ith foreign investment may, on
recommendation of the foreign investment approving body , and with the approval
of the Nepal Rastra Bank , obtain the foreign exchange facility for such amount as
may be required for the following purposes:
(a) To pay such remuneration a s may be payable to any foreign expert,
technical or managerial employee employed in the industry in
accordance with Section 27 ,
(b) To pay the principal or interest of any bonds or debentu res issued in
accordance with sub -section (1) of Section 11 ,
(c) To repatriate the foreign investment or income earned in accordance
with Section 20 .
(2) After obtaining approval from the Nepal Rastra Bank in accordance
with sub -section (1), an industry with foreign investment may pay or use such
amount as approved from the foreign currency held in the account of such industry
as referred to in Section 25.
(3) Any foreign expert, technical or managerial employee employed in
an industry in acc ordance with Section 27 may repatriate to his or her country in
convertible foreign currency such amount of saving out of the remuneration
receivable by him or her , after paying income tax in Nepal in accordance with the
prevailing law.
(4) The exchang e or repatriati on of convertible foreign currency in
accordance with sub -section (2) or (3) shall be made according to the open market
exchange rate.
27. Provision relating to exp erts, top-level technical and managerial
employee s: (1) An industry with foreign investment shall fulfill the positions of
experts in its top -level management, high-level technical , managerial employees
or technical employees from amongst the Nepali citizens .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if an
industry with foreign investment cannot fulfil the positions of experts in its toplevel management, high-level technical , managerial employee s or technical
employees from among st the Nepali citizen s and it is necessary to transfer
technical knowledge or skill through any technical or exp ert of another country in
such an industry , the industry may employee any foreign citizen in accordance
with the prevailing law .
(3) The concerned industry shall provide details relating to the foreign
citizens employed in accordance with sub -section (2) to the Department. The
Department shall provide the details also to the Ministry of Finance , Ministry of
Home Affairs and Ministry of Labour , Employment and Social Security.
(4) The employees and workers employed in any industry with foreign
investment in accordance with sub -section (2) shall comply with the terms and
conditions referred to in the prevailing Nepal law.
28. Provision relating to industrial security : Such industrial security shall be
provided to any industry with foreign investment as may be available to any other
industry established in Nepal.
29. Facility of identity card : The D epartment m ay provide an identity card in the
prescribed form to any foreign investor who makes such foreign investment a s
prescribed.
30. Provision relating to visa facilit y: (1) The non-tourist visa not exceeding six
months shall be granted to a foreign citizen who visits Nepal to make a study ,
research or survey for foreign investment .
(2) The business visa shall be granted to a foreign investor or one
authorized representative of him or her and the family members of such an investor
or representative to stay in Nepal until the foreign investment equal to such
minimum amount as prescribed is maintained.
Explanation : For the purpose of this Section , the term “family member ”
means the husband or wife , father , mother and minor son, daughter of the foreign
investor or his or her authorized representative.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (2), in the case
of an investor who makes investment exceeding the prescribed amount , such
facility shall be provided only to a maximum of two persons and his or her family
member.
(4) The residential visa shall be provided to a foreign investor who
makes fore ign investment in an amount exceeding one million US dollars or in
convertible foreign currency equivalent thereto at one time or to the authorised
representative of him or her and the family member of such a person until the
foreign investment equal to such minimum amount as prescribed is maintained.
(5) The tourist visa shall be provided to any foreign exp ert, technical or
managerial employee to be employed in an industry in accordance with Section
(6) The body giving working approval and work permit for the non -
tourist visa shall make decision whether or not to give working approval or work
permit, after completing the necessary procedures not later than fifteen days.
(7) Other provisions relating to visa facility shall be as prescribed.
31. Provisions relating to land: (1) A foreign investor shall have to manage such
land a s may be required for the industry , by purchasing it on his or her own or
through other means in accordance with the prevailing law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if a foreign
investor is unable to purchase or manage the necessary land on his or her own for
the operation of the industry as prescribed and makes a request , setting out the
content, for the purchase or acquisition of the land , the foreign investment
approving body shall make necessary recommendation , coordination and
facilitation for that purpose.
(3) If such land as in excess of the ceiling is required for an industry
which is operated or to be operated with foreign investment , for the establishment
and operation of the industry , the body registering the industry shall make
necessary recommendation , coordination and facilitation in accordance with the
prevailing law. The land that is not subject to s uch ceiling shall be used only for
the same purpose for which it has been purchased.
(4) Other provisions relating to the provision of land in lease to a n
industry with foreign investment and to the ceiling of land shall be in accordance
with the Industrial Enterprises Act and the prevailing law .
(5) Other provisions relating to the land to be provided to any industry
to be operated with foreign investment shall be as prescribed.
32. National treatment to be accorded: (1) In respect of the terms applicable to the
management, maintenance, use, transfer and sale of any foreign investment made
in Nepal by a foreigner, subject to this Act and other prevailing law, after the
commencement of this Act, such foreign investment sha ll, after the investment is
brought into, and until it remains in Nepal, be accorded national treatment no less
favourable than that accorded to any investment made by a Nepali person, in
respect of the terms applicable to the management, maintenance, use, transfer and
sale of such investment.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), in the case
of a foreign investment approved prior to the commencement of this Act, the
provision s contained in the prevailing law relating to foreign investm ent in force
at the time of making such an investment shall apply , and no change shall , without
his or her consent, be made that may prejudice to any facility obtained by any
foreig n investor in accordance with that law.
(3) The following protection shall be accorded to any industr y with
foreign investment in accordance with sub -section (1):
(a) The industr y, enterprise with foreign investment shall be accorded
the same treatment as accorded to any industry of the same nature
with investment made by a Nepali citizen.
(b) The industr y, enterprise with foreign investment shall be free to
determine the price of goods and services , subject to the prevailing
(c) No industry , enterprise with foreign investment shall be prevente d
from doing trade , as prescribed , being l imited to that industry.
(d) No industry , enterprise with foreign investment shall be restricted
to repatriate profit , investment , pay interest of , and repay the
principal of , a loan.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), national
treatment shall not apply in respect of the following matters :
(a) Matters relating to the creation of such intellectual property rights,
limits thereof, transfer of title thereto or provisions requiring
compulsory li censing for the use thereof as specified in any
agreement made under the World Trade Organisation ,
(b) Matters relating to the exemption or facility, if any, granted to any
domestic industry or goods in accordance with the prevailing Nepal
law relating to public procurement,
(c) Matter relating to any grant or concession to be made or provided
by the Government of Nepal ,
(d) Matter of non-commercial services to be pro vided by the
Government of Nepal ,
(e) Such measures relating to financial services as may be adopted or
managed by the Government of Nepal upon considering appropriate
on matters such as m atters relating to the protection of investors,
participants in the securities market, insurance policy holders or
insurance policy claimants, or relating to financial institutions
having liability to safeguard the financial interests of any persons or
relating to maintaining soundness , morality or financial
responsibility of financial institution s,
(f) Matters involving liability or provision to accord special treatment
by the Government of Nepal because of being a party to any regional
or multilateral economic , monetary organisation or organisation of
similar nature to which the Government of Nepal is or will be a
party,
(g) Matters relating to the terms that may be specified by the regulatory
body in accordance with the prevailing law in respect of repatriation
of investment to a foreign country, re payment of loan (including
principal, interest and fees), payment of service fees ,
(h) Matters relating to the protection of human , animal and plant health
or the environment .
33. Nationalisation or expropriation not to be made: (1) No industry with foreign
investment in accordance with this Act shall be nationalised .
(2) No industry shall , except for a public purpose, be expropriated
directly or indirectly . If it is required to exp ropriate it for the public purpose , due
process referred to in the prevailing law shall be fulfilled.
34. Change in terms , services and facilities : Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Act or the prevailing law , if any provision made in a manner to
change the terms of foreign investment s and any exemption, facility or concession
receivable by foreign investor s is to the disadvantage of any foreign investor
having obtained approval prior to the making of such provision , such a change
shall not apply to such an investor.

Chapter -6
Grievance Handling and Action
35. Grievance handling : (1) I f a foreign investor or industry has any grievance with
respect to any act or action performed by any authority that register , regulate or
monitor industries in accordance with the prevailing law or by any authority of the
Single Stop Service Centre, such an investor or industry may make an application ,
setting out that content , to the Department for it hearing .
(2) The Department shall address , as prescribed, the grievance received
in accordance with sub -section (1).
(3) If a foreign investor or industry has any grievance with respect to
any act or action performed by the Department or Single Stop Service Centre, such
an investor or industry may make an application , setting out the content , to the
Ministry for its hearing.
(4) The Ministry shall address , as prescribed , the grievance received in
accordance with sub -section (3).
36. Prohibition on acts , actions contrary to the t erms: If any foreign investor or
industry with foreign investment is found to have done any act contrary to this Act
or the rules fr amed under this Act and the terms specified while giving approval
for foreign investment , such approval may be revoked or it may be caused to
rectify the error , upon fulfilling the procedures as prescribed.
37. Monitoring and inspection of industries : (1) T he officer designated by the
Department may, as required, make monitor ing and inspect ion of any industr y with
foreign investment .
(2) The officer who makes monitoring and inspection in accordance
with sub -section (1) shall, not later than three days after the date of completion of
the monitoring and inspection, give a report to the Department , setting out the
details inter alia whether or not the foreign investor or industry ha s done any act
contrary to Section 36 .
(3) Other provisions relating to monitoring and inspection of the
industry shall be as prescribed .

Chapter 7
Miscellaneous
38. Bilateral or multilateral investment agreement may be concluded : The
Government of Nepal may bring into foreign investment by concluding a
multilateral or bilateral investment agreement with any foreign friendly country or
international institution for the promotion of foreign investment .
39. Agreement may be made : (1) In makin g investment in any industry jointly by a
Nepal i investor and a foreign investor , a joint agreement concerning foreign
investment may be made with respect to that investment, subject to this Act.
(2) The agreement referred to in sub -section (1) shall provide for , inter
alia, the terms of joint , distribution of profits earned from the investment and
settlement of disputes relating to investment.
40. Settlement of disputes : (1) I f there ar ises any dispute between a Nepali investor
and a foreign investor in relation to foreign investment , the Department may make
it necessary facilitation in order that such a dispute is settled by the concerned
parties through mutual discussions or negotiations.
(2) If the dispute cannot be settled through the process referred to in
sub-section (1) within a period of forty-five days after the dispute has arisen, and
a joint investment or dispute settlement agreement exists between the parties to
the dispute for the resolution of such a dispute , the dispute shall be settled in
accordance with such an agreement .
(3) The parties shall give information about the settlement of the
dispute in accordance with sub -section (2) to the Foreign Investment Approving
body not later than fifteen days of its settlement .
Provided , that the parties shall not be bound to give information about on
what terms and conditions such a settlement has been made .
(4) If the agreement concluded between the parties in accordance with
sub-section (2) has no provision about the settlement of dispute s, such a dispute
shall be settled by arbitration in accordance with the arbitration law of Nepal.
(5) Any dispute arising in connection with any foreign investment shall
be settle d by arbitration in accordance with the prevailing Rules or Procedure s of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) , unless
otherwise agreed upon by the parties to the dispute .
(6) Arbitration to be conducted in accordance with this Section shall be
held in Nepal , and substantive law of Nepal relating to arbitration shall apply .
Provided , that with respect to the case referred to in subsection (2), the
provision contained in that sub -section shall apply .
(7) If no agreement was made between the parties on the settlement of
dispute prior to the arising of the dispute or if they realise that the agreement , if
any made, is inadequate, the concerned parties may make an agreement for the
settlement of a dispute even after the dispute has arisen. I nformation of t he
agreement so made shall be given to body registering the industry .
(8) Any dispute with respect to the agreement made in accordance with
sub-section (7) may also be settled in accordance with this Section.
41. Electronic means may be used : The foreign investment approving body may
perform functions relating to approval for foreign investment in accordance with
this Act and other acts and actions related thereto through recognised electronic
means , in accordance with the prevailing law relatin g to electronic transactions.
42. Provision s relating to automatic approval process may be made : (1) The
Government of Nepal may, by notification in the Nepal gazette , provide services ,
such as registration of companies , registration of industries , approval of foreign
investments in accordance with this Act and the prevailing law , through the
automatic route in order to make the process of foreign investment simple , easy.
(2) Other provisions relating to the automatic route referred to in sub -
sectio n (1) and the online system shall be as prescribed.
43. Validity period of approval of foreign investment : (1) T he approval of foreign
investment given by the foreign investment approving body shall remain valid for
a period until such investment remains in Nepal .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), such
approval shall be deemed to be ipso facto ineffective in the following
circumstance :
(a) In the event of failure, except for any reasonable reason, to
commence bringing into Nepal of the amount of such foreign
investment within two years after the date of the approval of foreign
investment,
(b) In the event of transfer of cent percent ownership of an industry with
foreign investment to a Nepali investor as a result of the sale of
shares in the industry register ed with the approval of foreign
investment,
(c) In the event of the revoc ation of its registration as a result of a
default on the part of the industry having got approval for foreign
investment or the company establishing such an industry.
(3) Other provisions relating to the validity period of the approval of
foreign investment shall be as prescribed.
44. Terms to be complied with: A foreign investor shall comply with the terms as
prescribed, in addition to the terms referred to, in this Act.
45. Production may be made upon making contract: (1) Any industry with foreign
investment may produce any part of its production or such subsidiary goods or
services as required for the industry, except its main production , by a contract with
another industry.
(2) Other provisions relating to production upon making contract shall
be as prescribed.
46. Power of attorney may be given: (1) A person who wishes to make foreign
investment in accordance with this Act give a power of attorney to an other person
to perform any , some or all of the acts, actions required to be performed by that
person . A ll acts , actions performed by the authorised person in accordance with
the power of attorney shall be deemed to have been performed by the investor
himself or herself .
(2) In order to perform the act in accordance with a power of attorney
given in accordance with sub-section (1), such a power of attorney shall be
notarized and provided to the foreign investment approving body . The foreign
investment a pproving body may , if it so consider s necessary , look at the original
of such a power of attorney .
(3) A person who is authorised in accordance with sub -section (1) may
not delegate the authority conferred on him or her to another person .
(4) The person who gives a power of attorney may, at any time,
withdraw the power of attorney given by him or her. T he power of attorney shall
become invalid from the date on which the person giving such power of attorney
registers the information o f such withdrawal of the power of attorney with the
foreign investment approving body.
(5) Other provisions relating to the giving of power of attorney shall be
as prescribed.
47. Delegation of powers: The Board or Department may , as required , delegate some
powers out of the powers conferred on it in accordance with this Act or the rules
framed under this Act to any body or officer of the Government of Nepal.
48. Foreign investment in any industry register ed in Province : (1) If foreign
investment or transfer of technology is to be made in an y industry registered by
the Government of a P rovinc e in accordance with the prevailing Federal or
Provincial law , approval of the Department shall be obtained in accordance with
this Act.
(2) The certificate of registration of industr y with the Province and
recommendation of the P rovincial ministry looking after the matters of industr y,
among other things, shall be submitted in order to obtain the approval in
accordance with sub -section (1).
(3) Other provisions relating to foreign investment in an industry
registered in a Province shall be as prescribed .
49. Application of prevailing law : The matters contained herein shall b e governed
by this Act and the other matters shall be governed by the prevailing law relating
to industrial enterprises and other prevailing law .
50. Power to make alteration in the Schedule : The Government of Nepal m ay, by
notification in the Nepal gazette , make necessary alteration in the Schedule .
51. Power to make rules : The G overnment of Nepal may frame necessary rules for
the implementation of this Act.
52. Power to make and enforce Directives, Procedures or Standards: The
Government of Nepal m ay, without prejudice to this Act and the generality to the
Regulation framed under this Act, make and enforce necessary Directives,
Procedures or Standards .
53. Repeal and saving : (1) T he Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer Act,
1992 ( 2049) is hereby repealed.
(2) The acts and actions performed under the Foreign Investment and
Technology Transfer Act, 1992( 2049) shall be deemed to have been performed
under this Act.
Schedule
(Relating to sub-section ( 2) of Section 3)
Industries or Businesses Restricted for Foreign Investment
1. Poultry farming, fisheries, bee -keeping, fruits, vegetables, oil seeds, pulse seeds,
milk industry and other sectors of primary agro -production,
2. Cottage and small industries,
3. Personal service business ( hair cutting, tailoring, driving etc.) ,
4. Industries manufacturing arms, ammunition , bullets and shell, gunpowder or
explosives, and nuclear, biological and chemical (N.B.C.) weapon s; industries
producing atomic energy and radio-active materials ,
5. Real estate business ( excluding construction industries) , retail business, internal
courier service, local catering service, moneychanger, remittance service,
6. Travel agency, guide involved in tourism, trekking and mountaineering guide,
rural tourism including homestay,
7. Business of mass communication media (newspaper, radio, television and online
news) and motion picture of national language,
8. Management, account, engineering, legal consultancy service and language
training, music training, computer training , and
9. Consultancy services having foreign investment of more than fifty -one percent.