E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
The Copyright Act, 2059(2002)
Date of Royal Assent and Publication
2059.4.30 (15 August 2002)
Act number 8 of the year 2059 (2002)
An Act Made to Provide for Copyright
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to make timely the legal provisions relating to copyright;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by Parliament in the first year of reign of His Majesty the King
Gyanendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev.

Chapter - 1
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Copyright Act,
2059 (2002).
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise require, in this Act,-
(a) "Work" means any work presented originally and intellectually in the field of
literature, art and science and in any other field, and this term includes the
following work:
(1) Book, pamphlet, article, thesis,
(2) Drama, dramatic-music, dumb show and a work prepared to perform in
such manner,
(3) Musical notation with or without words,
(4) Audio visual works,
(5) Architectural design,
(6) Photography, painting, work of sculpture, work of woodcarving,
lithography, and other work relating to architecture,
(7) Photographic work,
(8) Work of applied art,
(9) Illustration, map, plan, three-dime nsional work relating to geography,
and scientific article and work,
(10) Computer program.
(b) "Author" means a person who creates a work as referred to in clause (a) above.
(c) "Audio-visual work" means a cinematographic work that can be viewed in
screen, with or without sound.
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(d) "Photographic work" means a work produced by using light or any other
radiation recorded in the surface in such a manner that the image (picture) of
any thing can be set in the surface or that the image (picture) can be created
from such surface with the help of chemical, electrical or any other
technology.
Provided, however, that a still photography taken from any audio-visual work
shall not be considered as a photographi c work but as a part of the concerned
audio-visual work.
(e) "Sound recording" means the act of recording of sound of any performance
recorded in any manner and with any method whatsoever for the purpose of
hearing, except the act of recording sound and image at the same time.
(f) "Performance" means,-
(1) In the case of work other than the audio-visual work, performance
made through recitation, playing music, dancing, acting or any other
manner, directly or with the help of any other device or method,
(2) In the case of the audio-visual work, sequential video clipping of the
scene contained in such a work, along with sound for hearing purpose,
(3) In the case of the sound recording, act of performance made outside
the family circle, neighbors, friends or relatives or made in such
manner that it can be heard publicly despite the presence of such
persons.
(g) "Economic right" means the rights conferred on the copyright owner pursuant
to Section 7.
(h) "Copyright owner" means the author of a work in cases where the economic
right of that work is vested in that author, a person or organization in cases
where the economic right of the work is primarily vested in the person or
organization other than the author, and a person or organization, in cases
where the economic right of the work is transferred to that person or
organization.
(i) "Broadcasting" means communication or exhibition of a work for public
information or broadcasting of audio or audio-visual work through wireless
equipment or satellite.
(j) "Communication to the public" means the act of broadcasting and audio or
visual broadcasting or both either by wire or wireless equipment in such a
manner that it can be heard or viewed staying near or far from the place of
broadcasting.
(k) "Moral right" means the right to be conf erred to the author or his successor or
any person authorized by the author pursuant to Section 8.
(l) "Performer" means any actor, singer, musician, dancer and other person who
performs a literary or artistic work or folklore expression to the general public
through acting, singing, music and dancing.
(m) "Publication" means:
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(1) In the case of a work of drama, motion picture, or work performed in
any other manner, the shows, sale or rental of such a work publicly
with or without translating or altering it,
(2) In the case of any other work, the work which has been publicly sold,
distributed or utilized or so brought out as to be sold and distributed or
utilized publicly, with or without translating or altering it; and, in the
case of a work that can be exhibited through acting, this term includes
its exhibition in a public manner with or without translating or altering
(n) "Registrar" means the person specified pu rsuant to sub-section (1) of Section
(o) "Royalty collecting body" means the body formed pursuant to Section 39.
(p) "Prescribed" or "as prescribed" means pres cribed or as prescribed in the rules
framed under this Act.

Chapter-2
Acquisition and Protection of Copyright
3. Protection of copyright: (1) Copyright protection shall be extended to any work.
(2) Any translation, arra ngement, sequential arrangement of work or collection
of works presented as original from viewpoint of presentation, collection or
expression, data or database readable with or without support of machine, any
proverb, folktale, folk song falling under folk expression or any other derivate works
based on folk expression shall be protected as original work, without prejudice to the
copyright of the original work.
4. Non-availability of copyright protection: Notwithstanding anything contained in

Section3, copyright protection under this Act shall not be extended to any thought,
religion, news, method of operation, concept, principle, court judgment,
administrative decision, folksong, folktale, proverb and general data despite the fact
that such matters are expressed or explained or interpreted or included in any work.
5. Registration not compulsory: (1) Registration of a work, sound recording,
performance or broadcasting shall not be required to acquire the right under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in cases where any
person intends to get any work, sound re cording, performance or broadcasting
registered voluntarily, that person may make an application to the Registrar and get
the same registered; and the procedures on registration shall be as prescribed.
6. Owner of economic right of work: (1) The author of a work shall be the first owner
of the economic right of that work.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the economic right
of a work shall vest in the following person or organization in the following
circumstances:-
(a) Co-author in the case of a joint work;
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
Provided, however, that where such a joint is divided in different parts and each
part can be identified as of different au thors and the work can be used separately,
the economic right shall vest in the concerned author in respect of each part
created by that author.
(b) In cases where a joint work is prepared at the initiation or direction of any person
or organization, that person or organizati on at whose direction or initiation such a
work has been so prepared,
(c) In case where a work is prepared on payment of remuneration by any person or
organization, that person or organization who has paid such remuneration,
(d) In the case of an anonymous work, the publisher of that work, until the authorship
of such a work is proved.
Provided, however, that in cases where the real author of such a work presents his
identity subsequently, the economic right of that work shall vest in that author
from the date of presentation of his identity.
(e) In the case of an audio-visual work, the producer of such a work except as
otherwise provided for in the contract.
Provided, however, that in case where the work of the co-author of an audiovisual work or a pre-existing work is incorporated or adapted in making the audiovisual work, their economic right shall be according to their respective
contribution.
7. Economic Right: Subject to provisions of Chapter-4, only the author or the owner of
copyright shall have the exclusive right to carry out the following acts in respect of
the work:
(a) To reproduce the work,
(b) To translate the work,
(c) To revise or amend the work,
(d) To make arrangement and other transformation in the work,
(e) To sell, distribute or rent the original and copy of the work for the general public,
(f) To transfer or rent the right of audiovisual work, work embodied in sound
recording, computer program or musical wo rk in graphic form conferred to that
author or owner,
(g) To import copies of the work,
(h) To have public exhibition of the original or copy of the work,
(i) To perform the work in public,
(j) To broadcast the work,
(k) To communicate the work to the general public.
8. Moral right: (1) The author of a work shall have the following moral rights,
irrespective of whether that author has the economic right to that work:
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(a) To get his name mentioned in copies of his work or in his work where it is
used publicly,
(b) In cases where, instead of his real name, a pseudonym is mentioned in his
work, then to get that pseudonym mentioned while using such a work
publicly,
(c) To prevent such acts as undermining his reputation or goodwill earned by
him, by mutilating his work or presenting it in a distorting manner,
(d) To make necessary amendment or revision in his work.
(2) The right referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be transferable during the
life of the author.
Provided, however, that where the aut hor has nominated any one whom such
right is to be transferred after the death of the author, such right shall devolve on the
person or organization so nominated, and on his nearest heir, failing such nomination.
9. Rights of performer: (1) The performer shall have the right to perform the following
acts:-
(a) To take one's performance to the general public through broadcasting or
communication,
(b) To determine modality or medium of making one's performance and
reproduce it,
(c) To take one's performance to the ge neral public for the first time by
making performance or selling or transferring copies thereof or changing
ownership,
(d) To rent copies of one's performance,
(e) To take the performance produced through the determined modality or
medium to the general public in an easily available manner, through wire
or wireless equipment,
(f) To amend or revise one's performance.
(2) The performer shall not be allowed to re-exercise the rights mentioned in
sub-section (1) once he has authorized his performance to be incorporated in audiovisual medium.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the performer shall
have the right to have his identity maintained as the performer of direct audio
performance as well as of the performance incorporated in the sound recording and to
make a claim for the same, and, where any person has so mutilated or distorted his
performance or otherwise deformed his performance by mutilating the meaning as to
prejudice his reputation or goodwill, to prevent such acts.
(4) Nothing mentioned in this Section shall be deemed to have any effect on
the right of a performer to enter into, or to be agreed on, an agreement with such
terms as may yield much more benefits or facilities to him from his performance.
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(5) The right conferred to the performer pursuant to this Section shall be
protected for a period of fifty years from the year of incorporation of performance in
sound recording device, and for a period of fifty years from the year of such
performance where such incorporation has not been made.
10. Right of sound recording producer: (1) The sound recording producer shall have
the following rights:-
(a) To reproduce the sound recording, directly or indirectly, in any manner or
in any form,
(b) To import copies of the sound recording,
(c) To make the sound recording easily available by way of sale or ownership
transfer or otherwise of the original or copies of the sound recording,
(d) To rent or lease the sound recording publicly,
(e) To make the sound recording capable of being heard with wire or wireless
equipment from any specific place or from the place of one's own choice
or by the general public.
(2) The term of the right referred to in sub-section (1) shall be of fifty years
from the year of publication of such a sound recording.
11. Reasonable remuneration for the use of sound recording: (1) In cases where a
sound recording published for commercial pu rpose or a reproduced copy of such
sound recording is directly used for broad casting or other communications and is so
performed to the people publicly, the producer shall get a reasonable remuneration
from the user of the same.
(2) The performer shall get the remuneration as per the agreement, in cases
where any, made between the performer and the producer on the remuneration
referred to in sub-section (1), and half the amount received by the producer where no
such agreement is made.
(3) The term of the right to receive reasonable remuneration under sub-section
(1) shall be for fifty years from the year of publication of such a sound recording or
from the year of fixation of such a sound recording.
12. Right of broadcasting organization: (1) The broadcasting organization shall have
the right to carry out the following act:-
(a) To re-broadcast the subject it has broadcast,
(b) To so communicate its broadcast as to make it easily available to the
general public,
(c) To make fixation of its own broadcast,
(d) To reproduce the fixation of its broadcast.
(2) The term of the right referred to in sub-section (1) shall be for fifty years
from the year of commencement of such broadcast.
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
*13. Protection of work, performer, sound recording producer or broadcasting
organization : (1) A work of the following author shall enjoy protection under this Act:
(a) A work created by the author residing in Nepal or in a member country of the
World Trade Organization and published in Nepal or in that country,
(b) An audio-visual work produced by a producer residing in Nepal or in a member
country of the World Trade Organization,
(c) An architectural design of a building ma de in Nepal or in a member country of
the World Trade Organization or other kind of artistic work used in a building
or any other structure,
(d) A work published in Nepal by an author residing in a country other than Nepal
or a member country of the World Trade Organization or an audio-visual work
produced in Nepal by a producer of such other country.
(2) The following performer shall be entitled to the rights relating to performer as
referred to in this Act:
(a) A performer of Nepal or a member c ountry of the World Trade Organization,
(b) A performer of the performance made in Nepal or in a member country of the
World Trade Organization or of the performance contained in the sound
recording protected under this Act or of the performance contained in a
broadcast even though it is not contained in the sound recording.
(3) The following sound recording producer shall be entitled to the rights relating to
sound recording producer as referred to in this Act:
(a) A sound recording produced by a person in Nepal or a member country of the
World Trade Organization,
(b) A sound recording published in Nepal or in a member country of the World
Trade Organization.
(4) The following broadcasting organization shal l be entitled to the rights relating to
broadcasting organization as referred to in this Act:
(a) A broadcast by a broadcasting organization with its office in Nepal or in a
member country of the World Trade Organization,
(b) A Broadcast by a broadcasting station s ituated in Nepal or in a member country
of the World Trade Organization.

Chapter: 3
Term of protection of Copyright
14. Term of protection of copyright: (1) The economic and moral rights available to the
author under this Act shall be protected throughout the life of the author and in the
case of his death until fifty years computed from the year of his death.
* An Ordinance Made to Amend Some Nepal Acts relating to Export and Import and Intellectual Property - Date of Royal
Assent: 2062/6/7/6 (Friday, Sept. 23, 2005 A.D.)
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(2) The economic and moral rights over the work prepared jointly shall be
protected for fifty years computed from the year of death of the last surviving author.
(3) The economic and moral right of the work prepared pursuant to clauses (b)
and (c) or sub-section (2) of Section 6 shall be protected until fifty years from the date
of first publication of such work or the date on which the work is made public,
whichever is earlier.
(4) The economic and moral right of the work published anonymously or with
pseudonym name shall be protected until fifty years from the date of first publication
of such work or the date on which the work is made public, whichever is earlier.
Provided, however, that in cases where the name of author is published within
that period of time, the protection referre d to in sub-section (1) or (5) shall be
available depending on the case.
(5) The economic and moral right of a work relating to applied art and
photographic work shall be protected until twenty-five years from the year of
preparation of such work.
15. Term of protection of work pub lished after the death of author: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 14, the work published after the death of the author
where there is only one author of such work and after the death of one of the authors
where there are two or more authors shall be protected until fifty years from the year
of publication of that work.

Chapter-4
Circumstances where the copyrighted materials can be used without authorization
16. Reproduction allowed for personal purpose: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in clause (a) of Section 7, no authorization shall be required from the author
or the copyright owner to reproduce some portions of any published work for personal
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no reproduction of
an architectural design erected as a building and other construction related design or a
significant portion of any book or of a musica l work as notation of all or significant
portion of a database through digital transmission shall be allowed in a manner to be
prejudicial to the economic right of the author or the copyright owner.
17. Citation allowed: Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of Section 7,
some portions of a published work can be ci ted for fair use without authorization of
the author or the copyright owner in a manner not to be prejudicial to the economic
right of such author or owner. In making such citation, its source and the author'
name, in cases where it appears, shall also be mentioned.
18. Reproduction allowed fo r teaching and learning: (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in clause (a) of Section 7, the following acts may be done for teaching and
learning activities without authorization of the author or the copyright owner in a
manner not to be prejudicial to the economic right of such author or owner:-
(a) To reproduce a small portion of any published work by way of citation,
writing or audio-visual aid,
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(b) To reproduce, broadcast and exhibit some portions of the work for
purposes of educational activities to be performed in the classroom.
(2) All copies reproduced pursuant to sub-section (1) have to indicate the
source and the author's name.
19. Reproduction by library and archives: Notwithstanding anything contained in
clause (a) of Section 7, in cases where a public library or archives, witch makes
available the work stored in it at the request of a person doing research or study
without deriving economic profits directly or indirectly, looses any work with it or
such work is destroyed or is old or is incapable of being obtained, it may reproduce
one copy of such a work without authorization of the author or the copyright owner of
such work.
20. Reproduction, broadcast and other communication allowed for purposes of
information to the general public: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
clauses (a), (i) and (j) of Section 7, the following acts can be done, by mentioning the
sources and name of the author of any work, without authorization of the author or the
copyright owner of such work.
(a) To print in any newspaper or journal or to make broadcast or other
communication to public of any article, article under political or religious
topics or similar other broadcasts published in any newspaper or journal.
Provided, however, that such act shall not be prejudicial to the economic
right of the author or the copyright owner.
(b) To reproduce, broadcast or otherwis e communicate or justify any event
with a view to informing the general public about any current event.
(c) To reproduce, broadcast or to make communication to public some
portions of any regular newspaper or journal regularly publishing
information for communication to the general public or pleadings made on
court proceedings with a view to disseminating current information.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in cases where the
author himself has indicated that his work is prohibited from being reproduced,
broadcast and other kinds of communicat ions, no reproduction, broadcasting and
other communication shall be allowed.
21. Reproduction of computer program: Notwithstanding anything contained in
clauses (a) and (c) of Section 7, in cases where the objectives for which a computer
program was acquired could not be achieved or with a view to maintaining records or
where the computer program acquired legally is lost or destroyed or is incapable of
being used, one copy of the computer program can be reproduced without
authorization of its author or copyright owner.
22. Importation allowed for personal purposes: Notwithstanding anything contained in
clauses (g) of Section 7, one copy of any work can be imported for personal purpose,
without authorization of its author or copyright owner.
23. Public exhibition allowed: Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (h) of

Section 7, in cases where any person intend s to have public display of any work or
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
copy of the work, he may do so without authorization of its author or copyright
owner.
Provided, however, that such public disp lay has to be made without the help of
film, slide, television image or otherwise using the screen or device of other kind.

Chapter-5
Transfer of Copyright
24. Transfer of Copyright: (1) The copyright owner may transfer all or any of the
economic rights conferred on him to any one by making a written agreement or
authorize any one to use the same with or without specifying any terms.
(2) The person entitled to moral rights may, for the protection of moral rights,
transfer his moral rights to any one, with effect after his death, by making a written
agreement, with the terms and conditions that his name shall not be removed from the
work.
(3) The person to whom the rights are transferred by the copyright owner
pursuant to this Section shall not carry out any other activities except the rights so
transferred.

Chapter-6
Infringement of Protected Right and Punishment
25. Infringement of protected right: (1) Any one who carries out the following act shall
be considered to have infringed the right protected under this Act:-
(a) To reproduce copies of a work or sound recording and sell and distribute
them or publicly communicate or rent them with commercial or any other
motive with or without deriving economic benefits without authorization
of the author or the copyright owner or by infringing the terms contained
in the agreement or license notwithstanding that such authorization has
been obtained,
(b) To do advertisement or publicize by copying a work belonging to another
person with a motive of taking advantage of the reputation gained by that
work,
(c) To make work of another subject or nature by changing the form and
language of a work belonging to another person with a motive of deriving
economic benefit,
(d) To make an attempt to take benefit by adapting any work directly or
indirectly with intention of making the viewer, listener or reader believe it
to be another work through advertisement or by any other means,
(e) To import, produce or rent any equipment or device prepared with
intention of circumventing any device designed to discourage the
unauthorized reproduction,
(f) To produce or import, with intent to sell, any equipment facilitating
unauthorized reception of a program broadcast by encrypting it in a code
language,
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
(g) To import, sell, distribute and use a mechanical device prepared with a
sole object of infringing the copyright, except those mentioned in clauses
(e) and (f).
(2) No one shall, with knowledge of publication of any work or sound
recording or where there is adequate ground to believe it, sell and distribute and rent
copies of work or sound recording so published, in contravention of sub-section (1).
26. Restriction on the importat ion of unauthorized copies: Importation of copies of
work or sound recording, either made in a foreign country or sourced otherwise, into
Nepal for business purpose shall not be permi tted if preparation of such copies would
be considered illegal if they were prepared in Nepal.
27. Punishment on infringement of protected right: (1) In cases where any person
infringes Section 25, such a person shall be punished with a fine of a sum from ten
thousand to one hundred thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months or both and with a fine of a sum from twenty thousand to two
hundred thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or
with both for each instance from the second time. The materials so published or
reproduced or distributed or devices used to reproduce such materials shall be seized.
(2) Compensation for the loss caused to the copyright owner by the infringer
of the protected right shall also be realized and provided to the copyright owner.
28. Punishment for importation of unauthorized copy: In cases where any person
imports unauthorized copies of any work in violation of Section 26, such a person
shall be punished with a fine of a sum from ten thousand to one hundred thousand
rupees according to the gravity of the offense, and such copies shall be seized; and
compensation for the loss caused to the copyright owner from such importation shall
also be realized from the importer and provided to the copyright owner.
29. Other punishment: In cases where any person infringes any other matter contained
in this Act or the Rules framed under this Act, such a person shall be punished with a
fine of a sum from five thousand to fifty thousand rupees according to the gravity of
the offense.

Chapter-7
Miscellaneous
30. Registrar and his functions, duties and powers: (1) Government of Nepal may, by
a notification in the Nepal Gazette, designate any officer of at least Gazetted second
class to act as the Registrar pursuant to this Act.
(2) In addition to those mentioned elsewhere in this Act, the functions, duties
and powers of the Registrar shall be as follows:
(a) To monitor and control the royalty collecting body,
(b) To hear petitions as prescribed made by any party who is not satisfied with
the royalty fixed by the royalty collecting body,
(c) To perform, or cause to be performed such other functions as prescribed
for the accomplishment of the objective of this Act.
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
31. Appeal against order and decision of Registrar: Any party who is not satisfied with
any order or decision made by the Registrar may make an appeal in the Appellate
Court in the area where the Office of the Registrar is situated, within thirty-five days.
32. Power to seize copies of work, sound recording or other materials: (1) In cases
where any person doubt that any one has published or reproduced or is about to
publish or reproduce any work or sound recording contrary to Section 25 and makes a
complaint before the police investigating the offense under this Act, the police shall
make necessary arrangements for preventing the copies of such work or sound
recording from being sold and distributed and may, in cases where required, search
the copies of such work or sound recording and seize the same pursuant to the law in
force.
(2) In conducting search and seizure pursuant to sub-section (1), the machine
including materials used to publish and repr oduce the copies of such work or sound
recording may also be seized.
33. To destroy copies of work, sound recording or other materials: In cases where the
copies of the work or sound recording seized pursuant to Section 32 are held by the
court liable to be seized, they shall be dest royed in presence of the representatives of
the District Administration Office and the Local body.
34. Power of Customs Officer to stop importation of unauthorized copies: (1) In
cases where any person suspects that any other person is importing copyrighted
materials into Nepal in an unauthorized manner, such a person may make an
application, accompanied by the evidence, to the Custom Officer to prevent the
importation of such material.
(2) In cases where, in conducting necessary investigation upon receipt of an
application pursuant to sub-section (1), the demand of the applicant appears
reasonable, the Customs Officer may prevent the materials to be imported for a
maximum of twenty working days at the rate of ten working days at a time.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), in cases
where the Customs Officer learns or suspects that any one is importing copyrighted
materials into Nepal in an unauthorized manner, he may prevent such materials for a
maximum of twenty working days at the rate of ten working days at a time.
(4) Other procedures on the prevention of importation of unauthorized copies
shall be as prescribed.
35. To try and settle cases: (1) The concerned District Court shall have the powers to try
and settle cases punishable under this Act.
(2) In trying and settling cases under this Act, the procedures referred to in the
Summary Procedures Act, 2028 (1971) shall be followed.
36. Power to order for withholding: In cases where, in the course of trying and settling
a compliant pursuant to this Act, the Distri ct Court, at the request of the concerned
party, thinks it reasonable to stop any activity contrary to this Act, it may order the
concerned person or body to stop such activity.
E:\¤RATNA¤\Act and Regulation\The Copyright Act-2059(2002)_Eng.doc
37. To be state cases : (1) The cases punishable under Sections 27 and 28 shall be state
cases and those cases shall be considered to be included in Schedule-1 of the State
Cases Act, 2049 (1992).
(2) A police officer of at least the rank of police inspector shall investigate and
inquire into the cases under this Act.
38. Limitation: In cases where any right under this Act is infringed, a suit has to be filed
within three months of the knowledge of such infringement.
39. Provisions relating to royalty collecting body: (1) Generally, one royalty collecting
body shall be formed as prescribed in one discipline for the purposes of fixing,
collecting and distributing royalty of the works relating to copyright.
(2) The royalty collecting body formed pursuant to sub-section (1) has to be
registered with the Registrar in the manner as prescribed.
(3) The royalty collecting body shall be an autonomous body corporate with
perpetual succession.
(4) The royalty collecting body shall have a seal of its own for all of its
activities.
(5) The royalty collecting body may, like an individual, acquire, use, sell and
dispose of or otherwise manage movable and immovable property and may, like an
individual, sue and be sued by its name.
(6) Government of Nepal may specify the terms to be followed by the royalty
collecting body; and it shall be the duty of the royalty collecting body to abide by
such terms.
40. Copyright of Government of Nepal: (1) Government of Nepal shall have the
copyright over the work prepared by Government of Nepal.
(2) Government of Nepal may rent or se ll the right accrued to it pursuant to
sub-section (1) to any person or organization or give authorization to use the same in
any other manner.
41. Calculation of year: In calculating a year pursuant to this Act, it shall be calculated
from the New year as per Bikram Sambat that starts from the end of the year on which
the work was published or communicated publicly or sound recording was produced.
42. Powers to frame rules: Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules in order to
carry out the objectives of this Act.
43. Repeal and saving: (1) The Copyright Act, 2022 (1965) is hereby repealed.
(2) The remaining term of protection of the copyright of a work published
publicly prior to the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been
protected pursuant to this Act.
(3) The acts and actions done and take n under the Copyright Act, 2022 (1965)
shall be deemed to have been done and taken under this Act.
Note:- The term "His Majesty's Government" is converted into "Government of Nepal" by the some Nepal
Laws amending Act, 2007.