The Consumer Protection Act, 2075 (2018)
Date of Authentication
2075/6/2 (18 September 2018)
Act Number 10 of the year 2075 (2018)
An Act Made to Provide for Amendment and Consolidat ion of Laws
Relating to Consumer Protection
Preamble:
Whereas , it is expedient to make amendment to and consolidation of the legal
provisions relating to consumer protection in order to protect and promote constitutional
right s of the consumer s to obtai n quality goods and services, to provide judicial remedy
for the enforcement of the rights obtained by the consumer s, and provide compensation
for harm and injury likely to be caused to the consumers ;
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament.

Chapter -1
Preliminary
1. Short Title and C ommencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the “Consumer
Protection Act, 2075 (2018) ."
(2) This Act shall commence immediately.
2. Definition: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act, -
(a) "Court" means the C onsumer Court referred to in Section 41.
(b) "Unfair trade and business" means any activity referred to in Section
(c) "Production " means the process of producing , preparing, refining,
changing, mixing, packaging or repackaging , assembling or
labeling , or any or all the processes to be adopted in this regard
(d) "Consumer" means a person or institution that consumes or use s any
goods or service s.
(e) "Consumer association " means the institution establish ed under the
prevailing law with the objective of protecting and promoting the
rights and welfare of the consumers.
(f) "Centr al Monitoring Committee" means the Central Market
Monitoring C ommittee referred to in Section 25.
(g) "Sub-standard goods" means consum er goods of any of the
following conditions:
(1) Goods the quality of which falls short of the standards
determined under Section 6 or in which the quantity of an
essential ingredient has been lowered, or any other material
has been mixed .
(2) Goods which are stale, rotten or stored or prepared in dirty
or toxic conditions or in which any chemical, colour or
flavour has been used, so tha t they become harmful to human
health ,
(3) Goods which are fully or partly made of any diseased or
disease -generating animals or birds or harmful vegetation ,
(4) Goods which are produced , transported, hoarded , stored or
sold witho ut meeting the standard prescribed,
(5) Goods which have no quality of consumable goods if it is
prescribed, and as mentioned by the producer , if it is not
prescribed,
(6) Goods the quality of which falls short of the minimum
necessary standard s or exceeds t he maximum standard s
prescribed , if any, in this Act or in the rules framed under
this Act.
(h) "Prescribed" or "as prescribe d" means prescribed or as prescribed in
the rules framed under this Act.
(i) "Inspection Officer " means the Inspection Officer appointed or
designated pursuant to Section 32 .
(j) "Council" means the Consumer Protection Council to be formed
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 22.
(k) "Laboratory " means the body established with the objective of
testing the purity, perfection or quality of the goods and recogn ized
by the Government of Nepal.
(l) "Ministry" means the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Supply
of the Government of Nepal.
(m) "Label" means a tag, sign, picture or other descriptive thing written,
printed, litho graphed, signed, embossed , included or displayed in
any othe r manner , in or on the goods or the container containing
such goods.
(m) "Goods" means the substance which the consumers consume or use
or the materials made of the mixture of goods which do not inflict
harm and injury or any kind of side effect to health , and this term
also includes the raw material, colo ur, fragrance or chemical to be
used in the production of such goods.
(n) "Price of goods" means the price the price labeled at the time of
production , maximum retail price ( M.R.P. ), the price fixed in the
import declaration form or the price fixed at the source by the
producer .
(o) "Selle r" means the person, firm, company or institution that sells
and distributes goods or services.
(p) "Department" means the Commerce, Supplies and Consumer
Welfare Protection Department.
(q) "Service" means electricity, drinking water supply , telephone,
information technology , he alth, education and consultation ,
transport, drainage , banking or other services of similar nature, and
this term also includes legal, medical or eng ineering services.
(r) "Defective product " means any goods or services that do not contain
such minimum safety measures due to any of the following as are
reasonably expected by the general people while using any product :
(1) defective design, construction, refinement, mixture or
installation,
(2) defective packaging, protection or storage,
(3) defective presentation,
(4) lack of sufficient measure or precaution to control the
potential risk or hazard as per the nature of the produced
goods or services,
(5) product which is different or pirated or imitated from the
product produced by the manufacturing company possessing
the intellectual property right.

Chapter -2
Provision s Relating to C onsumer s Protection
3. Right s of the consumer: (1) Every consumer shall have the right to obtain quality
goods and services.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub -section (1), for the
purpose of protecting the rights, interests and concern of the co nsumers , every
consumer shall have the following rights:
(a) right of easy access to goods or service s,
(b) right to choose quality goods or service s at the fair
competitive price,
(c) right to be informed of the price, quantity, purity, quality etc.
of the goods or services,
(d) right to obtain information from the producer , importer or
seller regarding the quantity, ingredient or percentage of the
substances contained in the goods made of or produced with
the mixture of two or more than two substances ,
(e) right to be safe from the sale and distribution of the goods
and services that inflict harm to the human body, life, health
and property,
(f) right to get appropriate legal action taken against the unfair
trade and business activities,
(g) right to obtain compensation against harm and injury caused
with the use of goods or services,
(h) right to receive remedy or hearing from the competent
authority or entity on the protection of the rights and interests
of the consume rs,
(i) right to get consumer education.
4. Regulation of good s or service s: (1) The Government of Nepal shall regulate the
supplies, price, quality, measurement, label, advertisement of t he goods and
services regularly in order to protect the rights of the consumers .
(2) The Minist ry shall perform the following functions in conducting
regulation pursuant to sub-section (1) :
(a) to implement the policy relating to quality, price
determination and supply system of goods or services,
(b) to prevent or control monopoly or unfair trade activities that
cause or possibly cause adverse impact upon the rights and
interests of the consumers , or to formulate and implement a
plan of action in this regard,
(c) to maintain fair market by continuously analyzing and
reviewing the condition of demand and supply of the goods
or services used within the country,
(d) to make necessary provision s to prevent and c ontrol the price
determined or increased in an undesired manner by the
producer , seller or distributor of the goods or service s,
(e) to facilitate the supply system through the institutions or
private firms or companies having full or partial ownership
of the Government of Nepal in order to ensure the supplies
of the food and other goods for the consumers at a fair price
and easy manner,
(f) to fix the maximum quantity of t he storage of the goods in
any special circumstance, or at any particular place, for the
period prescribed,
(g) to receive foods from the producer s at the prescribed price
and sell them to the general people with determining certain
quantity of such foods in case there is a shortage of any foods
produced within Nepal,
(h) to make necessary provision to maintain uniformity in the
price in general, by managing whole sale or retail business,
(i) to coordinate with the concerned agencies to prevent
artificial shortage of any goods or services from occurring or
to regularly distribute the goods in all places , for protecting
the rights of the consumers and regulating the supply system ,
(j) to regulate the sale and distribution system of goods , and
control the act of creating scarcity or black -marketing in an
inappropriate manner or the unfair business activities.
(3) The Government of Nepal may, i n order to protect the rights of the
consumers, regulate the supply system and control the price and quality of the
goods and services, make necessary policy and institution al provis ions from time
to time.
(4) The provision referred to in sub-section (3) shall have to be
implemented as prescribed.
5. Quality of good s and service s: (1) In case the quality or standard s of any
substance inherent in any goods have not been determined, the Government of
Nepal shall determine the standard s or quality of such goods or service s by
fulfilling the process as prescribed.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall have to publish the notice of the
matters of the standard s or quality of any goods or service determined pursuant to
sub-section (1) in the Nepal Gazette.
6. To affix label: (1) A producer shall have to affix label on the goods produced by
him or her .
(2) The f ollowing matters shall have to be mentioned in the label
pursuant to sub-section (1):
(a) Name, address of the producer and registration number of the
industry,
(b) Mixture, ingredient of mixture , quantity and weight of the
goods, i n such goods as food, medicine s and cosmetic s,
(c) In the case of the goods of which quality has been
determined , the quality of such goods,
(d) Mode of using the goods and side effect likely to occur due
to the use of such goods ,
(e) In the case of the goods supposed to be used within a certain
deadline, such deadline,
(f) Retail price, batch number and date of manufacture of the
goods,
(g) If it is electronic, hardware, electrical or machinery or goods
to be in use for a l ong time, guarantee or warranty and
guarantee or warranty date of such goods , and other
necessary things in accordance with the law related to such
goods,
(h) If any defect is seen in the condition referred to in clause (g),
provision to make reimbursement or to repair until certain
period,
(i) In the case of the goods that are inflammable, hazardous or
likely t o break down easily, details relating to precaution to
be adopted for the safety of such goods,
(j) Maximum retail price to be incurred after including all types
of taxes applicable for the goods,
(k) If any process is supposed to be fulfilled prior t o using any
goods, such process ; and harm and injury likely to occur
when it is used without fulfilling such process,
(l) Use of awareness -oriented message, picture or sign on the
label of the materials of the types of causing harm upon
human health,
(m) Other matters as prescribed.
(3) The matters to be specified in the label pursuant to sub-section (2)
shall have to be written in the Nepali or English language by the producer in the
case of the goods produced within Nepal and by the importer in the case of the
goods imported , in the way which can be understood by common people.
(4) The goods on which label is not affixed pursuant to sub-section (3)
shall not be allowed to be imported, sold and distributed in Nepal.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, it
shall not be necessary to specify the matters set forth in this Section, while selling
consumable goods such as vegetables, frui ts to be sold openly.
Provide d that the label shall have to be affixed on the imported vegetables
and fruits.

Chapter -3
Liability of Parties Associated to Market ing of Goods or Service s
7. Liability of producer : (1) While produc ing goods or services, the producer shall
have to fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled
under the prevailing law s:
(a) to produce quality goods or services,
(b) to determine the label of the goods,
(c) to specify the matters referred to in Section 6 on the label,
(d) not to produce defective p roduct ,
(e) to collect and destroy the goods produced by him or her if it
is informed that such goods remain in the market upon
having been defectively produced ,
(f) to provide reasonable compe nsation if any kind of damage is
caused to the consumer due to the manufa cture of goods and
service,
(g) not to make wrong or misleading advertisement or publicity
of the goods or services,
(h) to provide the consumer with i nformation as to the quantity,
ingredi ents or percentage of the substances contained in the
goods made of or produc ed with the mixture of two or more
than two substances.
(i) to fulfill such other conditions as prescribed by the law.
(2) If the liability pursuant to sub-section (1) is not fulfilled or any
fault, deficiency and defect occur s in the process of production , construction,
refinement, design, formula, preparation, import, packing, labeling , and harm and
injury is caused to anyone’s body, life, property after using such goods or services,
the producer of such goods or services shall be respo nsible for such harm and
injury and shall have the liabili ty to provide compensation for the same .
Provided that,
(a) it must be the actual producer of the goods or services, the
use of which causes harm and injury,
(b) direct cause must be established that harm and injury is
caused with the consumption or use of the goods or services
as claimed for causing such harm and injury.
8. Liability of importer: (1) While importing goods, the importer shall have to
fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under
(a) to import without exceeding or making different from the
cost price,
(b) to provide details of the goods relating to the imported goods
when so demanded by the concerned agency or official,
(c) not to import the goods prohibited to be imported under the
prevailing law,
(d) to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), except for
the provision made otherwise as per the quality or nature of any goods, the goods
shall be forbidden to be imported which are not supposed to or cannot be used
after six months from the date of being import ed or which cannot be use d after the
expiry of such period.
(3) If anyone imports the goods without specify ing the matters to be
specified on the label, and if harm and injury is caused to anybody due to the use
of such goods, the importer shall be responsible for such harm and injury and be
liable to provide compensation for the same .
9. Liability of carrier : The carrier shall have to fulfill the following liabilities, in
addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under law:
(a) to transport within the determined time period as per the
nature of the goods to be imported,
(b) to prevent degradation in the quality of goods while
transporting ,
(c) to completely abide by the safety arrangement and the
conditions to be abided by as prescribed, while transporting,
(d) to provide the de tails of the goods when the concerned
agency or official so demands,
(e) to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
10. Liability of hoarder : The hoarder who hoards the goods shall have to fulfill the
following liabilities in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under the prevailing
(a) to exercise care as per the nature of the goods while hoarding
such goods,
(b) to hoard upon adopting safety measures as prescribed so as
to prevent degradation in the quality as per the type or nature
of the goods, and not to do any act that may cause
degradation in the quality of goods,
(c) not to change or replace the label or de tails specified by the
producer ,
(d) to provide the de tails of the goods related to the hoarding of
the goods when the concerned agency or the official so
demands ,
(e) to adopt safety measure s as prescribed,
(f) to fulfill other liabilities as prescribed.
11. Liability of seller : The seller who sells the goods shall have to fulfill the following
liabilities, in addition to the liabilities to be fulfilled under the law:
(a) to sell the goods to the consumers without discrimination,
(b) to safely keep and safely sell the goods as per the type or
nature by preventing degradation ,
(c) to keep price list of the goods so that it is clearly seen and
understood by general people,
(d) to provide storage or details of the goods remained with him
or her when the concerned agency or official so demands,
(e) to abide by the provision of guarantee or warranty, if any, in
the goods,
(f) to sell the goods to the customer s on a first -come-first -served
basis ,
(g) to give the bill or receipt on selling the goods,
(h) to fulfill other liabilities as prescribed.
12. Liability of service provider: The service provider providing service to the
consumer shall have to fulfill the following liabilities, in addition to the liabilities
to be fulfilled under the law:
(a) to provide the consumer with the service without
discrimination,
(b) to keep nature of the service to be provided and the list of the
price to be paid by the consumers for such service received,
at the place visible to everyone, so that it is clearly
understood by the general people,
(c) to provide the de tails and documents related to the service to
be provided when the concerned agency or official so
demands ,
(d) to provide the service to the customer on a first -come-firstserve d basis,
(e) to give the bill or receipt after receiving the amount for the
service provided to the consumer,
(f) to fulfill such other liabilities as prescribed.
13. To determine level of market: For the purpose of protecting the rights of
consumers , managing the market in accordance with the market rule and making
market fair and transparent, the level s of market involved in taking the prescribed
goods or services from the producer or importer to the final consumer shall be as
prescribed.
14. To return goods: (1) If anyone wishe s to return , being dissatisfied with , any goods
purchased from the seller , he or she may return it to the seller within seven days
or take other similar goods equal to that price or the payment of the amount which
was paid while purchasing such goods.
(2) While returning the goods pursuant to sub-section (1), the seller shall
not be allowed to make deduct ion in the price or take any kind of additional charge.
(3) While returning the goods pursuant to sub-section (1), the bill or receipt
given by the seller at the time of purchasing such goods shall have to be produced .
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no goods may
be returned or taken as replacement in the following circumstances :
(a) if the qual ity or quantity of such goods is altered by the
purchaser after the purchase,
(b) in the case of the goods of such nature that they must be used
within the certain deadline, such deadline has already
expired ,
(c) in the case of the goods of such nature as being rotten,
overripe , such as milk, fruits, fish, meat , in case they are not
consumed instantly ,
(d) if the purchased goods are already used,
(e) if the seal is broken off in the case of sealed goods .
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, in the
case of sealed goods, such goods may be returned within fifteen days, in the
unbroken condition of the seal, or other similar goods equal to the same price may
be taken instead of such go ods.
15. To keep bill or invoice : (1) The importer, carrier , hoarder and seller shall have to
keep with them the producer or purchase bill or invoice of the goods or services
purchased for the purpose of sale.
(2) The bill or invoice shall have to be shown at the time when the
concerned official so demands.

Chapter -4
Prohibited Activities
16. Not to conduct unfair trade and business activities: (1) No one shall conduct or
cause to conduct unfair trade and business activities.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), if any of the following activities is
conducted , an unfair trade and business activity shall be deemed to have been
taken place :
(a) selling or providing the goods or service s by lying,
concealing, hiding or misleading the actual quality, quantity,
price, measurement, format or composition etc. of such
goods or service s,
(b) releasing false or misleading advertisement, or selling the
goods by making misleading advertisement,
(c) doing any of the following acts through oral, written or visual
means in the case of goods or service s:
(1) selling sub-standard goods by showing standard,
quality, quantity, class, composition , design as if
having special ty or quality,
(2) selling re-produced or old goods showing or
misrepresenting that they are new one,
(3) advertis ing or notify ing and disseminating, in false
and misleading manner , while selling the goods or
service s even when no benefit is obtained as declared,
(4) claiming, guarantee ing or sell ing any goods through
consumption or use of such goods without factual
ground.
(d) determin ing price in a manner to shift burden upon the
consumer price on the ground different than the ground of
actual cost of any goods or service s, or fixing the price by
including the cost of any contest, lotte ry, occasion, or selling
at such price,
(e) determin ing price by i ncluding the price or cost of other
goods to be obtained as donation, gift or without charge upon
the price of any goods or service, or selling such goods or
service at such price,
(f) producing , mix ing up or supply ing or transport ing or
hoarding or sell ing the goods so as to become less or more
than the quality or standard in any goods or service, or to
inflict harm and inju ry upon the consumer from the use of
such goods or service,
(g) creating artificial shortage of, hoard ing or selling, any goods,
(h) selling the goods by including the price of goods destroyed
by defective product or the price of goods contracted in the
course of business transa ction in the cost price of other
goods,
(i) producing or import ing fake goods or selling such goods to
displace any goods,
(j) refusing to issue bill or invoice of the sold goods or service,
or not issuing bill or invoice, or demand ing additional
amount while issuin g bill, invoice ,
(k) using poison or any chemical so as to inflict harm and injury
upon the consu mer while using any goods, or selling the
goods so used,
(l) selling the already expired goods by affixing new l abel on
such goods which is not consumable or is not supposed to be
used,
(m) importing, producing or sell ing sub-standard goods which
cannot be used,
(n) providing service without specifying the price, quality of
service, venue and time to provide service by a professional
service provider,
(o) selling so as to become contrary to sub-section (1) of Section
17 in collusion with the producer , importer, carrier , hoarder
or seller or such person and other person , organization and
institution,
(p) selling or providing by setting up levels or series more than
the business level prescribed while selling or providing any
goods or service s,
(q) selling without fulfilling the structure, measurement or
standard if any, prescribed for selling or providing any goods
or service.
17. Not to cause adverse impact on demand, supply or price: (1) No one shall sell,
distribute or transport or hinder the sale and distribution of any goods by taking
profit higher than that prescribed and over the cost invested in the production,
import, transport, hoardin g or s ale and distribution of that goods.
(2) No one shall cause adverse impact on the demand, supply or price
of any goods or service by doing any of the following acts, in association with any
person, instituti on or anyone else:
(a) determin ing quota of the raw materials required for the
manufacture of any goods, or reducing the production of any
goods or doing any other such work,
(b) creating artificial shortage by hoarding any goods or service
or by any other manner,
(c) selling the goods or service at the dete rmined time or place
only or doing other act s of similar nature .
18. Other act not to be done regarding goods or service: No one shall do o r cause
to be done any of the following acts, regarding any goods or service s:
(a) producing , sell ing or import ing sub-standard goods
knowingly ,
(b) selling any goods or service s by lying or deceiving that the
goods or service s are other goods or service s and stating high
standard goods for low standard goods or service s,
(c) producing or sell ing the goods or service that cause adverse
impact upon the health of consumer,
(d) affecting the price and supply sy stem by creating shortage of
the goods by accompanying with business persons or business
groups in order to manufacture, import or sell various goods
of the same nature,
(e) operating service by adopting a circle system, qu ota system,
rotation al system, trip system or token system , in cooperation
with more than one business person s or business group s that
provide any service of the same nature,
(f) making a provision requiring to purchase other goods too ,
while purchasing any goods.

Chapter -5
Provisions Relating to Determination of Price of Goods or Services
19. List of essential food and other goods and service: (1) The Government of Nepal
shall deter mine the list of essential food and other goods or services by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette from time to time.
(2) The m aximum price of essential food and other goods or service s
shall also have to be fixed in the list pursuant to sub-section (1).
(3) While selling the goods or service pursuant to sub-section (1), the
seller shall not sell , or cause to be sold, the same in a price higher than that referred
to in sub-section (2).
20. To keep price list and registration certificate: (1) Price list shall have to be kept
by clearly specifying the factory price of each of the goods by the produc er,
wholesale or retail price of goods to be sold and distributed by the seller , and price
of the service to be provided by the service provider.
(2) If it is a n industry to produce the goods, the industry registration
certificate, and in the case of business, business registration, license shall have to
be displayed at the p lace of sale in a way visible to the general people.
(3) The Government of Nepal may , by a notification in the Nepal
Gazette, establish a price information center as prescribed.
(4) The producer and wholesaler or retailer located in the district
concerned shall have to provide the factory price and the wholesale or retail price
respectively to the price information center established pursuant to sub -section
21. Provision to determine standard of price of goods or service: (1) The agency
as prescribed shall prepare the standard s relating to determination of price of
goods or service s as prescribed.
(2) While preparing standard s relating to price determination pursuant
to sub-section (1), profit amount to be taken by the seller also shall have to be
accepted as basis in such a way that production cost of the goods , transport
expenses, custom, tax, charge paid by the importer pursuant to law shall not be
more than the percentage fixed while selling.
(3) While preparing standard s relating to the determination of price of
any service, if the agency prescribed pursuant to sub-section (1) has assigned
anybody or authority in accordance with the law regulating or managing the
conduct and functions of the person who provides such a service, the standards
shall have to be prepared as per the s tandard s determined by such a body or
authority .
(4) While preparing standard s, in case the standard s are not determined
even after the body or authority is assigned pursuant to sub-section (3), such a
body or authority shall have to be consulted with .
(5) While preparing standard s relating to the determination of price
pursuant to sub-section (1) or (3), the standards may be determined differently to
make the maximum price , be taken for such goods or service s provided , on the
basis of the geographical region, nature of the service s and particular place.

Chapter -6
Consumer s Protection Council
22. Formation of Consumer s Protection Council: (1) There shall be formed a
Consumer Protection Council in order to make policy on the matter s of protecting
and implementing the rights of consumers and performing other functions under
this Act.
(2) The Council referred to in sub -section (1) shall consist of the
following Chairpe rson and Members:
(a) Minister for Industr y, Commerce and Supplies - Chairperson
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Industry , Commerce
and Supplies -Member
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development -Member
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Land Management,
Cooperative and Poverty Alleviation -Member
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Fi nance -Member
(f) Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs -Member
(g) Secretary, Ministry of Law, Justice and
Parliamentary Affairs -Member
(h) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Population -Member
(i) Chairperson, Federation of Nepalese Chamber s
of Commerce and Industry -Member
(j) Chairperson, Nepal Chamber of Commerce -Member
(k) Chairperson, Confederation of Nepal Industries -Member
(l) Chairperson, Federation of Nepal National
Industries and Entrepreneurs -Member
(m) Two persons including one woman
nominated by the Ministry from among
the persons having experience of at least
five years in the body or institution related
to the right s and welfare of the consumers -Member
(n) Director General , the De partment -Member -Secretary
(3) The t erm of the M embers nominated pursuant to clause (m) of subsection (2) shall be of two years, and they may be nominated again for another
term.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Ministry
may remove such a Member from the post at any time if any act is done contrary
to the rights and interests of the consumers or act is done in such a way that it
becomes contrary to the functions, duties and powers of the Council.
(5) Before removing from the post pursuant to sub-section (4), he or she
shall have t o be given a reasonable opportunity to submit clarification.
(6) The Chairperson and Members of the Coun cil shall be entitled to the
meeting allowance facility as prescribed by the Government of Nepal.
23. Meeting of Council: (1) The meeting of the Council shall be convene d at the date,
time and place fixed by the Chairperson.
(2) The meeting of the Council shall be convene d at least twice a year ,
and the interval between the two meetings shall not be more than six months.
(3) If more than fifty percent members of the total members of the
Council are present , it shall be deemed to constitute a quorum for the meeting of
the Council.
(4) The Chairperson of the Council shall preside over the meeting, and
in his or her absence, the Member selected from among the Members shall preside
over the meeting.
(5) Experts and scientists of different sectors, communities may be
invited to the meeting as necessary.
(6) The decision of the Council shall be authenticated by the Member -
Secretary of the Council.
(7) Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Council shall be as
determined by the Council itself.
(8) The Department shall perform the functions as the S ecretariat of the
Council.
24. Functions, duties and powers of the Council : The functions, duties and powers
of the Council shall be as follows:
(a) to submit to the Government of Nepal b y determining
policies on the matters regarding the protection and
enforcement of the rights of the consumers, supply system
and the determination of price and quality of goods and
services ,
(b) to provide necessary recommendation to the Government of
Nepal regarding the amendment, improvement in the existing
policies or new policies which are to be made regarding the
protection of the rights of consumers,
(c) to disseminate and cause to be disseminated information
relating to the rights and welfare of the consumers to get the
consumers informed regarding the goods and serv ices,
(d) to inform or get the consumers informed regarding the price,
quality, quantity, purity and unfair trade a ctivities of the
goods or services,
(e) to make necessary policy arrangements for including the
consume r education in the curriculum from secondary level
up to the university level,
(f) to draft necessary policies to cooperate with national and
international organizations or institutions related to the
rights of consumers,
(g) to give directive to the Provincial Government or Local
Level to protect and promote the r ights of the consumers as
necessary,
(h) to perform such other functions as prescribed.

Chapter -7
Provision s Relating to Inquiry , Inspection and Monitoring
25. Central Market Monitoring Committee: (1) A Central Market Monitoring
Committee shall be formed for the protection of the rights and interests of the
consumers or for making coordination among the bodies involved in the
monitoring or inspection of the supply system , price, quality and purity of the
goods or services.
(2) The Central Market Monitoring Committee referred to in sub-section
(1) shall consist of the following Members :
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Industry , Commerce
and Supplies -Coordinator
(b) Joint -secretary, Ministry of Industry ,
Commerce and Supplies ( responsible
the supplies) -Member
(c) Joint -secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs -Member
(d) Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock Development -Member
(e) Secretary, Ministry of Land Management,
Cooperat ive and Poverty Alleviation -Member
(f) Director General, Department of Food
Technology and Quality Control -Member
(g) Director General, Nepal Bureau of Standards -Member
(h) Director General, Department of Drug
Management -Member
(i) Director General, Department -Member -Secretary
(3) The procedures relating to the meeting of the Central Market
Monitoring Committee shall be as prescribed.
26. Function , duties and powers of Central Market Monitoring Committee: The
functions, duties and powers of the Central Market Monitoring Committee shall
be as follows:
(a) to take necessary initiative to make the goods or services
easily available, by identifying t heir shortage seen in the
market ,
(b) to monitor and supervise regarding the supply system , price,
weight, quality, purity etc. of the goods or services in the
market,
(c) to make recommendation of the procedures of operation of
market monitoring, monitoring team and consumers
organization s and institution s,
(d) to mai ntain coordination in the functions of the Market
Monitoring Team and Local Monitoring C ommittee,
(e) to give necessary directives to the bodies that protect the
rights and intere sts of the consumers and law enforcement
bodies in order to make market monitoring effective,
(f) to set up the Consumers Information C enter,
(g) to form committees or sub-committees as necessary,
(h) to perform such other functions as prescribed.
27. Provincial Market Monitoring Committee: (1) The Provincial Government
may, i n order to make necessary arrangements for protection of the rights and
welfare of the consumers, form a Provincial Market Monitoring Committee by a
notification in the Provincial Gazette , for carrying out inspection and monitoring
on the matters relating to the supply system , price, quality, purity of the goods or
services.
(2) The Provincial Market Monitoring Committee referred to in s ubsection (1) may form monitoring teams or sub-committees as necessary.
(3) The function s, duties and powers of the Provincial Market
Monitoring Committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall be as prescribed.
(4) Other provisions relating to the function s of the Provincial Market
Monitoring Committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in accordance with
the rule s framed by the Provincial Government.
28. Local Market Monitoring Committee: (1) The Rural Municipality or
Municipality may, f or the protect ion of the rights of consumers under this Act,
form a Local Market Monitoring Committee f or carrying out field inspection and
monitoring of the market on the matters relating to the supply system , price,
quality, purity of the goods or services .
(2) The Committee referred to in s ub-section (1) shall also consist of
the bodies and consumers under the Local Level in necessary number s.
(3) The functions, duties, powers, work proc edures and other necessary
matters of Local Market Monitoring Committee to be formed pursuant to subsection (1) shall be as prescribed.
(4) The Local Market Monitoring Committee to be formed pursuant to
sub-section (1) may form market monitoring teams or sub-committees as
necessary.
29. To form Market Monitoring Team: (1) In order to monitor and supervise
regular ly as to whether any unfair business activit y has taken place pursuant to

Section 16, price list is kept or not pursuant to Section 20, and regarding the
quality, quantity or price of goods or services, Mark et Monitoring Team or
Subject-wise Monitoring Team or Joint Monitoring Team consisting of the expert
of the related sector as well as Inspection Officer may be formed as prescribed.
(2) The Market Monitoring Team referred to in s ub-section (1) may get
information about or enquire into the quality, quantity, price determination of any
goods or services .
(3) The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub -section (1) may,
while getting information or making inquiry pursuant to sub-section (2) , demand
necessary document and evidence, and it shall be the duty of the producer or seller
concerned to submit such document or evidence.
(4) The Market Monitoring Team referred to in s ub-section (1) may
exercise all the powers conferred to the Inspection Officer under this Act.
(5) The Market Monitoring Team referred to in sub -section (1) shall,
while making monitoring and inspection of the market, use the market monitoring
and inspection form as prescribed.
30. To make inquiry or inspection : (1) If there is reasonable ground to believe that
any person is doing unfair trade or business activity , doing the act of affecting the
price or supply system by maintaining monopoly or any other manner in the
market, or producing or selling and distributing sub-standard goods, or doing any
act contrary to this Act or the rule f ramed under this Act, or if information is
received regarding such matters through any means of communication or any
complaint or through anyone that carrie s out surveillance , the Ministry or
Department may immediately inquire into or inspect that matter or cause such
inquiry or inspection to be made.
(2) Inspection or monitoring shall be carried out accordingly if the
prevailing law provides for monitoring and inspection, with respect to the
inspection or i nquiry pursuant to sub-section (1), and in other circumstances, the
Ministry may form immediately an inspection or inquiry c ommittee or designate
any committee formed under this Act or the Inspection Officer to that effect .
(3) Any producer , dealer, agent, seller , person or institution found
guilty from the inquiry or inspection pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be liable to
action under this Act or the prevailing law.
(4) If upon inspection or inquiry , the committee or the Inspection Officer
designated pursuant to sub-section (2) does not find that such an act falls under
this Act, the committee or the officer shall send the matter, along with the inquiry
or inspection file, to the concerned body for necessary action; and such a body
shall also give information about the action taken in that respect to such a
committee or officer.
31. Power to carry out casual inspection : (1) The Department may carry out casual
inspection for the protection of the rights , interests of the consumers.
(2) Other provisions relating to casual inspection shall be as prescribed.
32. Power to appoint or designate Inspection Officer : (1) The Department may, i n
order to carry out monitoring of availability of the quality goods or services at
appropriate price for consumers by making market and supply system effective,
appoint Inspection Officer or designate any officer employee of the Government
of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local Level to act as Inspection Officer as
prescribed .
(2) The qualification of the Inspection Officer appointed or designated
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.
33. Function s, duties and powers of Inspection Officer : (1) If there is reasonable
ground to believe that the unsafe goods having adverse effect or sub-standard
goods are being produced or sold , or services have been provided, or any acts are
being done contrary to this Act and the rule s framed under this Act, t he Inspection
Officer may, by entering into such a place at any time as necessary, inspect, i nquire
or search, arrest the person who commits such act and hold such a person in
detention for seven days with the permission of the case trying authority .
(2) In the course of inspection , inquiry or search pursuant to sub-section
(1), necessary description, information or statement may be taken from the
producer , importer, carrier , hoarder, seller , service provider or other related
person.
(3) While carrying out inspection , investigation or search pursuant to subsection (2), if it seems unsafe, affected goods or goods having no quality are being
produc ed or sold and distributed , or service provided or activities are contrary to
this Act and the rule s framed under this Act, the Inspection Officer may impose
restriction on produc ing or selling and distribution of such goods or providing
service s for prescribed period by taking sam ples of such goods as prescribed.
(4) A testing list of the goods or service s shall have to be prepared as
prescribed for the purpose of carrying out market inspection or inquiry pursuant
to sub-section (1).
(5) If it is not found to be in accordance with the testing list pursuant to
sub-section (4), the Inspection Officer may immediately impose the fine referred
to in Secti on 39 with restriction on the sale and distribution of such goods.
(6) The report relating to the functions carried out by the Inspection
Officer pursuant to sub-section (2) shall have to be submitted to the Department
within seven days.
(7) If a fine is imposed pursuant to sub-section (5) in the report pursuant
to Sub-section (6) , report shall have to be prepared by specifying such de tails as
well.
(8) If it seems appropriate to give any order immediately to the producer
or seller in course of inspection or i nquiry , the Inspection Officer may g ive such
an order or do such other act as appropriate.
(9) The procedures to be adopted by the Inspection Officer while
carrying out inspection , inquiry or search shall be as prescribed.
(10) The Inspection Officer may, w hile carrying out inspection , inquiry
or se arch, if it seems that any legal action is required to be taken against any
producer , seller , send it to the Department by mentioning such details in the report
as well , or to other bodies concerned with the reason if needed.
(11) The provis ions relating to other function s, duties and powers of the
Inspection Officer and the implementation of the report furnished by the
Inspection Officer shall be as prescribed.
34. Testing of goods: (1) The Inspection Officer shall forward , immediately the
samples of goods taken for testing pursuant to sub-section (3) of Se ction 33 to the
laboratory of the Government of Nepal or the laboratory accredited by the
Government of Nepal, as prescribed if the goods are of the nature of being instantly
rotten , overripe , and within twenty -four hours from the date of samples taken if
they are other goods.
(2) The Inspection Officer shall , while forwarding samples to the
laboratory pursuant to sub -section (1), have to forward them by giving symbol
number s to them .
(3) If a false result is given or negligence is found to have been made
while testing the goods in the lab oratory pursuant to sub-section (1), departmental
action shall be taken against such an employee .
35. To confisca te or destroy sub-standard goods: (1) If the goods are not found to
have the quality as prescribed while testing the samples of such goods forwarded
to the lab oratory for testing pursuant to Section 34, such goods shall be confiscated
and shall, as required , be destroyed as prescribed.
(2) When the goods are confiscated and destroyed pursuant to subsection (1), the producer , importer or seller shall have to bear the expenses for
confiscating or destroying such goods.
36. To make complaint: (1) If any goods or service provider performs any act against
the consumer interest or contrary to this Act or any rule framed under this Act,
any person who gets information of such m atters may make a complaint in writing
or orally or even through electro nic means to the Central Market Monitoring
Committee, Department or Inspection Officer , along with the information or proof
and evidence under his or her custody.
(2) If the person who makes a complaint pursuant to sub-section (1)
wishes to keep his or her name confidential, the name of such a person shall have
to be kept confidential.
(3) Other provisions relating to the complaint shall be as prescribed.
37. Action against person leaking information: (1) Departmental action shall be
taken against a public servant , who leaks the information of casual inspection or
the monitoring to be carried out regularly pursuant to Section 31, before such
inspection or monitoring takes place.
(2) If information is leaked by a consumers’ organi zation or institution
of consumers or other person involved in the act referred to in sub-section (1), the
Director General of the Department shall impose a fine on such person,
representative or institution in accordance with the claimed amount as revealed
and from fifty thousand rupees up to one hundred thousand rupees if the claimed
amount in not set out, and such an organization or institution shall be included in
the black list for a period not exceeding three years.

Chapter -8
Provision s Relating to Offence s and Punishment
38. Offences deemed to have been committed : If anyone does, or cause s to be done,
any of the following acts, he or she shall be d eemed to have committed the offence:
(a) failure to make the labeling pursuant to Section 6 or
mentioning false matters in the label,
(b) failure of the producer , importer, carrier , hoarder , seller or
service provider to fulfill his or her liabilities or doing any
act to breach such liabilities under Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
and 12 respectively ,
(c) failure of the seller to withdraw the goods within the deadline
prescribed or failure to give the goods equal to such price as
replace ment pursuant to Section 14,
(d) failure to keep the bills, invoices pursuant to Section 15,
(e) doing, or ca using to be done , the unfair trade activit y
pursuant to clause (a), (g), (j) or (l) of sub-section (2) of

Section 16,
(f) doing, or caus ing to be done , the unfair trade activity
pursuant to clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (h), (i), (k), (m), (o)
and (p) of sub-section (2) of Section 16,
(g) inflict ing, or caus ing to be inflicted , adverse impact on
demand, supplies or price pursuant to clause (a) of subsection (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 17,
(h) doing, or caus ing to be done , any act referred to in clause (b)
or (c) of sub-section (2) of Section 17,
(i) doing, or causing to be done , any act contrary to Section 18,
(j) selling, or caus ing to be sold , at the price higher than that
fixed by the Government of Nepal , contrary to sub-section
(3) of Section 19 ,
(k) failure to do , or caus ing not to be done , any act referred to
in sub-section (1) or (2) of Section 20,
(l) to sell or distribute goods or services contrary to the
standard s determined under sub-section (1) of Section 21,
(m) not to render assistance in the course of investigation ,
inspection or monitoring under this Act pursuant to subsection (2) of Section 54.
39. To impose fine instantly : (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 38,
if from the instantly received evidence, the producer , carrier , hoarder , importer,
seller of goods or service provider is found to have committed any offence , in the
course of market monitoring, inspection , inquiry , the Inspection Officer may
impose the fine as follows :
(a) From five thousand to twenty thousand rupees if the offence
referred to in clause (d) of Section 38 is committed , or caused
to be committed,
(b) From two hundred thousand to three hundre d thousand
rupees if the offence referred to in clause (e) of Section 38 is
committed , or cause d to be committed,
(c) From fifty thousand rupees to one hundred thousand rupees
if the offence referred to in clause (h) of Section 38 is
committed or caused to be committed,
(d) From fifty thousand to one hundred thousand rupees if the
offence referred to in clause (k) of Section 38 is committed ,
or cause d to be committed ,
(e) Up to twenty thousand rupees if the offence referred to in
clause (m) of Section 38 is committed , or cause d to be
committed .
(2) If the offence referred to in sub-section (1) is committed frequently,
double fine shall be impos ed for commission of the offence each time.
(3) The Inspection Officer shall have to inform the Department within three
days by revealing all the details including the cause to impose the fine instantly
and the amount charged thereof.
(4) The Inspection Officer may take the following actions against the
producer , carrier , hoarder, importer or seller of such goods who does not pay or
submit such fine within seven days from the date of the decision made to fine
instantly pursuant to sub-section (1):
(a) keeping such goods sealed until the fine is paid,
(b) withholding such other goods as well as to be produced ,
transported, hoarded, imported or sold by the producer ,
carrier , hoarder, importer or seller of such goods until the
fine is paid.
(5) If one is not satisfied with any act of the Inspection Officer under this
Section, an application may be made to the Director General of the Department
within seven days for the review of the matter .
(6) The Director General of the Department shall have to make a decision
in this regard within twenty -one days after examin ing whatever or whoever is to
be examined upon the application made against the decision by the Inspection
Officer pursuant to sub-section (5).
(7) While making an application for the review, fifty percent of the fine
imposed by the Inspection Officer shall have to be submitted as a cash deposit.
(8) The decision made by the Director General upon the application made
for the review shall be final.
(9) Other procedures to be adopted regarding the instant imposition of fine
by the Inspection Officer shall be as prescribed.
40. Punishment: (1) If any one commits , or causes to be committed, any of the
following acts which is deemed to be an offen ce under this Act , the Director
General of the Department may , according to the gravity of the offence, punish as
follows :
(a) with imprisonment f rom three months to six months or fine
up to fifty thousand rupees or both penalties if the offence
referred to in clauses (a) and (c) of Section 38 is committed ,
or cause d to be committed ,
(b) with imprisonment f rom three months to one year or fine
from one hundred thousand rupees to three hundred thousand
rupees or both penalties i f the offence referred to in clause
(i) of Section 38 is co mmitted ,
(c) with imprisonment f rom three months to six mont hs or fine
from fifty thousand rupees to one hundred thousand rupees
or both penalties i f the offence referred to in clauses (j) and
(l) of Section 38 is committed.
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the decision made by the Director
General of the Department under sub-section (1) may appeal to the concerned
District Court within thirty -five days.
(3) For the following offences, punishment shall be as follows:
(a) with imprisonment from two years to three years or fine from
three hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits , or causes to be
committed , the offence referred to in clause (b) of Section
(b) with imprisonment from two years to five years or fine from
four hundred thousand to six hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits , or causes to be
committed , the offence referred to in clause (f) of Section 38,
(c) with imprisonment from two years to three years or fine from
three hundred thousand to five hundred thousand rupees or
both penalties for one who commits , or causes to be
committed , the offence referred to in clause (g) of Section
(4) A person who commits, or causes to be committed, any other act
contrary to this Act or the rule s framed under this Act , Except for the acts under
sub-section (1), shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding two
years or fine up to three hundred thousand rupees or both.

Chapter -9
Provision s Relating to Consumer Court
41. Constitution of Consumer Court: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in order to
try and settle the cases other than the cases to be prosecuted pursuant to subsection (1) of Section 40 under this Act, constitute a Consumer Court as per
necessity, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) The venue and jurisdiction of the Consumer Court to be formed
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed in the same notice.
(3) The Consumer Court shall c onsist of the Chairperson and Members as
follows:
(a) District Judge of the concerned district
designated by the Government of Nepal -Chairperson
(b) Gazetted second class officer of Nepal Ju dicial
Service designated by the Government of Nepal -Member
(c) Gazetted second class officer of the Government
of Nepal designated by the Government of Nepal -Member
(4) The Government of Nepal shall notify the designation of the
Chairperson or Members pursuant to sub-section (3) in the Nepal Gazette .
(5) The Government of Nepal shall consult the Judicial Council before the
District Judge is designated as the Chairperson of the Court, and of the Judicial
Service Commission before the officer of the Nepal Ju dicial Service is designated
as a Member pursuant to sub-section (3).
42. Application of jurisdiction of Court: (1) All the members shall collectively
exercise the jurisdiction of the Court.
Provided that the Bench in which at least one Member is present may carry
out procedural matters other than detention , and the Bench in which two Members
are present may take all other matters including detention.
(2) If unanimity is not reached while trying and settling a case in presence
of two Members , the case shall be settled as per the opinion of the Chairperson if
it is the Bench including t he Chairperson in case it is the procedural matter of the
case.
(3) If it is the Bench in which the Chairperson is not present, it shall be as
per the opinion of the senior m ember based on the appointment. If it is the decision
or final order of the case , it shall be submitted to the Chairperson, and the opinion
supported by him or her shall be deemed to be the decision of the Court.
(4) The three Members shall collectively exercise the jurisdiction of the
Bench and majority opinion including that of the Chairperson shall be deemed to
be the decision of the Court.
(5) If all three Members have divergent opinion, the opinion of the
Chairperson prevails on the procedural matters and if it is on decision or final
order it shall be forwarded to the concerned High Court for the decision, by
specify ing the reasons for not being able to issue a decision or final order .
(6) Hearing of the case pursuant to sub -section (5) shall be held in the single
Bench of the High Court and the decision or final orde r made by such a Bench
shall be deemed to be the decision or final order of the Court.
43. Contempt of Court: (1) The Court may initiate proceedings against the contempt
of court and if the act of contempt of court is found to be proved, the Court may
punish the offender with a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or an
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or with both .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if the person
accused of contempt of court apologizes to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court
may not initiate the proceedings or excuse, reduce or change in punishment if the
punishment has already been determined or issue an order with effect of non -
execution of the sentence, if the conditions are complied with by the accused.
44. To make files or document s available : (1) If the Court or the Director General
of the Department order s any person, institution or office to submit or forward any
file, de ed, document or any other proof as evidence in the course of the
proceedings of the case, such a person, institution or of fice shall have to submit or
forward such a file, deed, document or evidence , within the deadline determined
by the Court or the Director General of the Department.
(2) If it is obstructed to try, hear or settle the case , or if harassment or harm
or injury is caused to any party due to the reason that any person, institution or
office has not complied with the order pursuant to sub-section (1), the Court or
Director General of the Department may impose upon such a person or institution
or chief of office a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees each time.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), if such a person
or institution or chief of office makes an application to the Court or the Director
General of the Department , within the time-limit determined by the Court or the
Director General, specifying the reason for not being able to abide by such order,
stating that fine should not be imposed , and if the statement of such application is
found to be reasonable, the Court or the Director General of the Department may
revoke such an order for imposition of the fine.
45. Appeal: An appeal may be made to the concerned High Court within thirty days
against the decision made by the Court under this Act.
46. Execution of d ecision s: If it is specified in the decision or order that the decision
or order is to be executed by any particular agency or official, the same agency or
official shall execute the decision or final order made by the Court under this Act ,
and if it is not specifi ed as such , it shall be executed by the concerned District
Court .
47. Dissolution of the Court: (1) The Government of Nepal may dissolve the Court
at any time by a notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(2) If the Court is dissolved pursuant to sub-section (1), the cases,
complaints or petitions remained pending at the time of dissolution after being
filed in such Court shall be ipso facto transferred to the concerned District Court
having territorial jurisdiction.
48. Special provision relating to action and finalization of case: Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 41, the concerned District Court shall have the
authority to take action, hear or try the case under this Act until the Court is
constitut ed pursuant to this Section.
49. To table notice: The Government of Nepal shall have to table the notice published
pursuant to sub-section (1) of Section 41 o r sub-section (1) of Section 47 in the
House of Representatives .

Chapter -10
Provision s Relating to C ompensation
50. Compensation may be claimed : If bodily , mental, financial, physical or other
kind of harm and injury is caused to any consumer by use of the goods or services
sold or distributed contrary to this Act, or damage is occurred as a result of
defective product ion of goods, the consumer himself or herself , or any consumer
association on his or her behalf , or the heir of the consumer if the consumer is
incompetent or has already died , may make a complaint to the Court for
compensation from the person who has produc ed, imported, hoarded, transported,
sold and distributed or provided such goods or service s within six months from
the date of harm and injury caused.
51. To provide compensation: If the consumer is wounded by the use of the goods
or service s sold, distributed or provided contrary to this Act, treatment expenses ,
interim relief amount for the daily subsistence as per the famil y circumstances
throughout the treatment period and, if it is proved , in course of the investigation,
that the consumer has suffered, the consumer , or the heir as per law , if he or she
has died, shall entitled to get the amount of compensation from the concerned
producer , importer, hoarder, carrier , distributor or seller concerned on the basis of
such harm and injury.
52. To determine the standard s of compensation: (1) The Court shall, w hile
determining the amount to be received by the consumer for compensation pursuant
to Section 51, have to determine it by taking following matters into consideration :
(a) physical or mental suffering or pain caused to the victim , and
its s everity ,
(b) estimated expenses to be made for treatment if curable
damage is caused ,
(c) depreciation caused in the capacity of the victim to generate
income due to the physical or mental damage,
(d) victim’s a ge and his or her famil y responsibility , if incurable
type of physical or mental da mage is caused ,
(e) number of victim’s family members who are dependent upon
him or her and minimum expenses required for the
maintenance of their livelihood if the victim has died,
(f) such other matters , out of the matters claimed by the victims ,
as found to be proper and appropriate,
(g) financial and business condition of the producer , importer,
hoarder, seller and service provider.
(2) Other provisions relating to the determination of compensation pursuant
to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed.

Chapter -11
Miscellaneous
53. To provide essential goods or services at fair price: The Government of Nepal
may make provision to provide the essential food s or other goods or service s
determine d pursuant to Section 19 at a fair price as prescribed.
54. To extend support: (1) If the Department seeks support of local administration
and police in the course of implementing this Act, it shall be the duty of the local
administration and the police to extend such support .
(2) In the course of c arrying out inquiry , monitoring or inspection under
this Act, it shall be the duty of all the concerned to extend necessary support to
the official carrying out such i nquiry , monitoring or inspection or to the person,
team or Inspection Officer deputed under this Act.
55. Liability of institution: (1) If any business institution commits any act considered
as offence under this Act, the official who works in the capacity of the chief
administrative official of such an institution shall have the responsibility and
liability of such act.
(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub-section (1), such a person
shall not have to bear the liability regarding the offence occurred before he or she
became the chief administrative official.
56. Reward to informant : (1) After eventually settling the case filed upon being
investigated as per the information provided by the person who provides
information that the offence has been or is going to be c ommitted, such a person
shall be re warded with the ten percent of the claimed amount recovered or on e
million rupees, whichever is the lesser.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no employee of
the Government of Nepal or corporate institution or the family member or
representative of the consumer s’ organization or institution or employee deputed
for mo nitoring or their family member shall be entitled to the reward referred to
in this Section.
(3) The n ame, address of the informa nt pursuant to this Section and the
details of the information received from him or her shall be kept confidential.
57. No to bar to prosecute case under prevailing law: If any act which is deemed
as an offence under this Act is also deemed as an offe nce under other prevailing
law, this Act shall not bar to prosecute the case under such law.
58. Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall be the
plaintiff in the case s under this Act.
59. Investigation and filing of case: (1) The Inspection Offic er shall carry out
investigation of the case relating to the offence under this Act.
(2) The Inspection Officer shall, after completing the investigation, have to
forward the matter to the concerned government attorney for the decision on
whether or not to institute the case , and if decision is made by the government
attorney to institute the case, the Inspection Officer shall file the case.
(3) While filing the case pursuant to sub-section (1), the Inspection Officer
shall file the case before the Director General of the Department in connection
with the case relating to the offence carrying the punishment referred to in subsection (1) of S ection 40, and before the Court if the Court has been constituted
and before t he District Court concerned i f the Court has not been constitut ed in
connection with the case carrying punishment referred to in sub-section (3) of

Section 40.
60. To follow summary procedure s: (1) While trying and settling the case s filed
under this Act, procedure s shall have to be followed pursuant to the Summary
Procedure s Act, 2028 (1972) .
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), general
procedure s shall have to be followed in the case s carrying the sentence of
imprisonment for more than three years.
61. Saving of act done in good faith: The Consumer Protection Council, Central
Monitoring Committee, Local Market Monitoring Committee, Inspection Officer
or any employee of the Government of Nepal, Provincial Government or Local
Level shall not be personally responsible for any act done by him or her in good
faith while performing his or her dut ies under this Act or the rule s framed under
this Act.
62. To be in accordance with this Act: The matters contained in this Act shall be in
accordance with this Act and other matters shall be in accordance with the
prevailing law.
63. Power to frame rules: (1) The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rule s
in order to implement this Act.
(2) The Provincial Government may f rame necessary rule s in order to make
the activities relating to market monitoring systematic and effective pursuant to

Section 27.
64. Power to frame and enforce directives, procedure s or standards: (1) The
Ministry may, i n order to implement this Act and the rules framed by the
Government of Nepal under this Act, frame and enforce directives, procedure s or
standards as necessary.
(2) The concerned Rural Municipality or Municipality may, i n order to
make the activities relating to market monitoring systematic and e ffective pursuant
to Section 28, frame and enforce necessary directives and procedure s.
65. Repeal and S aving: (1) The Consumer Protection Act, 2054 (1998) is hereby
repealed.
(2) The acts and actions performed under the Act pursuant to sub-section
(1) shall be deemed to have been performed under this Act.