The Environment Protection Act, 2019 (2076)
Date of Authentication
2076.06.24 ( 11th October , 2019 )
Act No. 9 of the year 2019 (2076)
An Act Made to Amend and Consolidate Law Relating to Environment
Preamble:
Whereas, it is expedient to amend and consolidate the prevailing law on
environmental protection in order to protect the fundamental right of each citizen to live
in a clean and healthy environment , provide the victim with compensat ion by the polluter
for any damage resulting from environmental pollution or degradation, maintain a proper
balance between environment and development, mitigate adverse environmental impacts
on environment and biodiversity and face the challenges posed by climate change;
Now, therefore, the Federal Parliament has made this Act .

Chapter -1
Preliminary
1. Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the "Environment
Protection Act, 2019 (2076).
(2) This Act shall commence on the eighth day of the date on which it
is authenticated.
2. Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in this Act:
(a) “Adaptation” means the prevention or mitigation of further loss and
damage upon projecting potential impacts and risks of climat e
change.
(b) “Emission” means emission of greenhouse gas or any other gas,
smoke or dust on the environment from any certain area in a certain
period.
(c) “Fund” means the environment protection fund referred to in

Section 31.
(d) “Climate change” means a gradual change of climate of the earth
which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters
the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition
to natural climate variability observed over comparable time
periods.
(e) “Climate change management” means the mitigation or adaptation
of problems arising as a result of climate change, and this term also
includes a totality of acts including policies, strategies, making
institutional mechanisms, provision of finance, cap acity building.
(f) “Hazardous substance” means any substance enlisted in the Basel
Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movement of
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal, and explosives,
inflammable, perpetual and substances with corrosive
properties and substances that are intended to be in use for the
first time upon be processed from raw materials not re -used
which cause adverse impact on the environment.
(g) "Biological diversity" means eco -system diversity, species diversity
and genetic diversity.
(h) “Prescribed” or “as prescribed” means prescribed or as prescribed
in the rules framed under this Act.
(i) “Mitigation” means reduction or prevention of emission of
greenhouse gas as a result of human activity.
(J) "Pollution" means the activities that significantly degrade, damage
the environment or harm the beneficial or useful purpose of the
environment, by changing the environment directly or indirectly as
a result of wastes, chemical, heat, noise, electrical, electro -magnetic
wave or radioactive ra y.
(k) "Proposal" means a proposal prepared in regard to the carrying out
of such development work, physical activity that may bring about
change in the existing environmental conditions or any plan, project
or programme which changes the land use.
(l) "Proponent" means a person or governmental, semi -governmental
or non -governmental agency or institution that makes application
for the approval of a proposal or that has go t approval for the
implementation of the proposal.
(m) "Initial environmental examination" means an analytical study or
evaluation to be conducted to ascertain as to whether, in
implementing a proposal, the proposal does have significant adverse
impacts on the environment or not, and with respect to the measur es
to be adopted for avoiding or mitigating such impacts by any means.
(n) “Supplementary environmental impact assessment” means an
environmental impact assessment to be made again vis -à-vis a
proposal submitted in order to make revision partly in physica l
infrastructure, design or form, transfer or alter a structure, add a
forest area or increase the project capacity on the environmental
impact assessment proposal which has been already accepted.
(o) “Council” means the national council on environment pro tection
and climate change management referred to in Section 32.
(p) “Provincial Ministry” means the Ministry of a Provincial
Government responsible for environment related matter.
(q) "Wastes" means the liquid, solid, gas, slurry, smoke, dust, radiated
element or substance or similar other materials disposed in a manner
to degrade the environment.
(r) "Ministry" means the Ministry of Forest and Environment of the
Government of Nepal.
(s) "National heritage" means any such object, physical structure, site,
plant or animal related with the environment available within Nepal
as is likely to be important to the human being from natural, cultural,
historical, archaeological, scientific, spiritu al, aesthetic or social
point of view.
(t) "Environment" means the interaction and inter -relationship among
the components of natural, cultural and social systems, economic
and human activities and their components .
(u) “Environmental study report” means a report prepared with respect
to the brief environmental study, initial environmental examination
or environmental impact assessment.
(v) "Environmental impact assessment" means detailed study and
evaluation to be made to ascertain as to whether, in imple menting a
proposal, the proposal does have significant adverse impacts on the
environment or not, and as to the measures to be adopted for
avoiding or mitigating such impacts.
(w) “Department” means the Department of Environment under the
Ministry.
(x) “Concerned body” means the body referred to in sub -section (2) of

Section 3 which is responsible for taking action and decision on the
environmental study report.
(y) “Brief environmental study” means a study to be made briefly as to
the measures to be adopte d for avoiding or mitigating the adverse
effects on the environment as a result of implementation of any
proposal.
(z) “Local Level” means a Rural Municipality or Municipality.

Chapter -2
Environmental Study
3. Environmental study report to be prepared: (1) A proponent shall prepare such
an environmental study report of such a proposal as may be prescribed.
(2) The environmental study report prepared pursuant to sub -section
(1) shall, in fulfillment of the process as prescribed, be submitted to the
follow ing body for approval:
(a) To the prescribed body , in the case of a brief environmental study
report or initial environmental examination of a development
project with national priority, a project to be implemented upon its
investment being approved by the Investment Board, a project of
national pride, a development or construction work or project falling
under the jurisdiction of the Federation in accordance with the
prevailing, a project requiring construction work to be done in more
than one Provinces or a project specified by the Government of
Nepal , and to the Ministry in the case of the environmental impact
assessment,
(b) To the body prescribed by the concerned Provincial law in the case
of a proposal relating to development, construction work or proj ect
pertaining to a matter f alling under the jurisdiction of the Provincial
Government,
(c) To the body designated by the concerned local law in the case of a
brief environmental study report or initial environmental
examination report on a proposal relati ng to development,
construction work or project pertaining to a matter falling under the
jurisdiction of the Local Level, and to such body of the Provincial
Government as prescribed by the Provincial Government in the case
of an environmental impact assessment report.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1) or (2),
nothing shall bar the approving of environmental study reports submitted for
approval at the time of commencement of this Act in accordance with t he legal
provisions in force at the time of submission of such reports.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Section, there
shall not be required an environmental study report for reconstructing as such a
heritage considered an ancient monument , in accordance with the law relating to
ancient monuments.
(5) In preparing an environmental study report, the proponent shall
hold, as prescribed, a public hearing as to the proposal.
(6) Other provisions relating to the submission of an environ mental
study report shall be as prescribed.
4. Detailed analysis of alternative to be made: (1) The proponent shall make
detailed analysis of possible adverse effects on the environment from the
implementation of such a proposal and various alternatives that can be adopted for
mitigation such effects, and recommend the alternative that is appropriate for the
implementation of the proposal and the grounds and reasons why that alternative
is implementable.
(2) In preparing the environmental study report pur suant to sub -section
(1), the proponent shall set out, inter alia, the possible short -term, mid -term and
long-term adverse effects on the environment from the implementation of the
project and the method and process to be adopted for mitigation thereof.
5. Scoping and work schedule : (1) Prior to preparing the environmental study report
of any proposal pursuant to this Act, the scope of such a proposal, in the case of a
brief environmental study and initial environmental examination, and scope and
work schedule, in the case of an environmental impact assessment shall be
approved by the concerned body.
(2) Other provisions on the scoping and preparation of the work
schedule referred to sub -section (1) and approval thereof shall be as prescribed.
6. Standards and quality to be maintained: (1) In preparing an environmental
study report pursuant to this Act, the proponent shall so prepare it in the form as
prescribed that the standards and quality determined by the Government of Nepal
are maintained.
(2) If the report is submitted contrary to the standards or qualify
referred to in sub -section (1) or without complying with such standards, the
consultant w ho has prepared such a report shall not be allowed to prepare an
environmental study report for a perio d not exceeding five years.
7. Environmental study report to be approved: (1) If an environmental study
report prepared in the context of the implementation of any proposal pursuant to

Section 3 is received, the concerned body shall make necessary inquiry into the
report.
(2) The concerned body may form a committee comprising a
representative of that body, representatives of the relevant bodies concerned with
the proposal and subject expert as required, to inquire into the environmental study
report recei ved pursuant to sub -section (1) and furnish advice and suggestions.
(3) If, in inquiring into the environmental study report received
pursuant to sub -section (1), it appears that further environmental study has to be
made in relation to such a proposal, the concerned body shall give order to the
proponent to make, or cause to be made, the initial environmental examination in
the case of the brief environmental study or the environmental impact assessment
in the case of the brief environmental study.
(4) The proponent shall make further study in pursuance of the order
given pursuant to sub -section (3) and submit a report thereof to the concerned
body.
(5) If, in making inquiry pursuant to this Section, it does not appear that
the implementation of such a proposal causes significant adverse impacts on the
environment, the concerned body shall approve such environmental study report,
upon specifying the terms and conditions to be observed by the proponent, as
required.
(6) Other provisions relating to the approval of the environmental study
report shall be as prescribed.
8. Proposal not to be implemented: No person shall implement, or cause to be
implemented, any proposal without having the environmental study report
approved pursuant to this Act.
9. Strategic environmental analysis: (1) Prior to the implementation of such policy,
program or project as may be specified by the Government of Nepal by a
notification in the Nepal Gazette, the strategic environmental analysis shall be
carried out in relation to such a policy, program or project.
(2) Other provisions relating to the strategic environmental analysis
shall be as prescribed.
10. Environmental management plan: (1) Prior to the implementation of a proposal,
the proponent shall prepare an environment al management plan as prescribed.
(2) In preparing the environmental management plan pursuant to sub -
section (1), the proponent shall set out, inter alia, which of the measures to mitigate
environmental adverse impacts will be adopted in the course of bu ilding the
project and which of such measures will be adopted after the completion, or in the
course of implementation, of the project.
(3) If it does not appear that the measures to mitigate environmental
adverse impacts set out by the proponent in the environmental management plan
pursuant to sub -section ( 2) are effective, the concerned body may give necessary
direction to adopt other effective measures, and the concerned proponent shall bear
the expenses incurred in the implementation of the direction so given by the
concerned body.
(4) The proponent shall make a clear action plan for the implementation
of e nvironmental management plan prepared pursuant to sub -section (1) and
implement it accordingly, and submit its progress report to the concerned body in
every six months after the commencement of the proj ect implementation.
(5) In adopting the measures to mitigate environmental adverse impacts
in the course of implementation of the e nvironmental management plan referred
to in sub-section (1) , priority shall be given to the operation of the program throug h
the local community which affected from the implementation of the proposal.
11. Supplementary environmental impact assessment to be made: (1) If it is
required to make some revision in the physical infrastructure, design or form,
transfer or alter the structure of any project of which the environmental impact
assessment report has been approved pursuant to Section 7 , add the forest area or
increase the capacity of the project, the proponent shall make a supplementary
environmental impact assessment in ord er to ascertain whether the operation of
such work causes adverse impacts on the environment or not, and whether such
impacts can be done away with or mitigated by any means or not.
(2) The proponent shall, i n order to make the supplementary
environmental impact assessment pursuant to sub -section (1), make an application
to the concerned body, along with an analysis of the reasons for making changes
in various components of the project and possible adverse impacts on the
environment from such changes, a comparative table according to environmental
indicators and other necessary justifications.
Provided that where the concerned body has given order to the proponent
to submit a supplementary environmental impact assessment report, the proponent
need not make an application.
(3) If the content is found reasonable upon inquiring into the application
received pursuant to sub -section (2), the concerned body may give permission for
a supplementary environmental impact assessme nt study as prescribed.
(4) Other provisions relating to the supplementary environmental
impact assessment shall be as prescribed.
12. To make environmental examination after commencement of service: (1) The
Ministry or prescribed body shall, not later t han six months of the date of
completion of two years of the commencement of production or distribution of the
service or goods or of the implementation of a proposal requiring the
environmental impact assessment pursuant to this Act , make analysis of the
adverse impacts on the environment as a result of the implementation of such a
proposal, measures adopted to mitigate such impacts, effectiveness of such
measures, adverse impacts that could not be mitigated or occurrence of any
unprojected /unforeseen adverse impacts and maintain undated records of the
environmental examination report.
(2) If the Ministry or prescribed body does not see , upon making
necessary study, in coordination with the concerned body with respect to the
environmental examination repo rt referred to in sub -section (1), that the measures
adopted to mitigate the adverse impacts on the environment are not adequate, it
may give appropriate order to the proponent to do away with or mitigate such
adverse impacts.
(3) It shall be the duty of the proponent to implement the order given
by the Ministry or prescribed body pursuant to sub -section (2).
13. Power to prevent : (1) If any person executes a project without having the
environmental study report approved pursuant to this Act or contrary to the
approved environmental study report, the concerned body may immediately
prevent the project from being executed.
(2) Where a project is prevented from being executed pursuant to sub -
section (1) and such prevention results in any harm to the propon ent, the proponent
shall not be allowed to make a claim of compensation for such harm.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), if the
proponent of the project prevented from being executed gets the environmental
study report to be app roved pursuant to this Act or makes improvement in the
project execution in accordance with the approved environmental study report, the
concerned body may release the prevention made pursuant to sub -section (1).
14. Power of the Government of Nepal or Pro vincial Government to make
environmental study: (1) The Government of Nepal or Provincial Government
may, on its own, map out any area or place and make the environmental study of
that area.
(2) The concerned body shall, on the basis of the descriptions obtained
from the study referred to in sub -section (1) shall prepare descriptions as to such
development, construction works or projects that can be executed in such area in
the future and work that is not appropriate for execution in such area.
(3) The concerned body shall maintain records of the descriptions
obtained from the study referred to in sub -section (1) and the descriptions referred
to in sub -section ( 2).
(4) The concerned body shall make public the descriptions referred to
in this Section, and the concerned proponent, body and party concerned shall act
in consistent therewith.

Chapter -3
Control of Pollution
15. Control of pollution: (1) The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette, determine necessary standards for the mitigation or doing away
with the impacts of pollution from any motor vehicle, device, equipment,
industrial enterprise , hotel, restaurant or ot her place or goods or activity or effects
from the disposal or emission of any hazardous substance.
(2) No person shall create pollution in such a manner as to cause
significant adverse impacts on the public life, public health and environment or
do, or cause to be done, any act contrary to the standards determined by the
Government of Nepal pursuant to sub -section (1).
(3) No person or group that visits a mountain or high hill area for
expedition, trekking, sightseeing or any other purpose shall do, or c ause to be
done, any such act that may cause adverse impacts on the environment by making
pollution contrary to the standards determined by the Government of Nepal.
(4) If it appears that any one has caused adverse impacts on the
environment by doing any act contrary to sub -section (1) or (2), the Department
may give direction to the relevant person, group or institution to take measures for
mitigation of or doing away with pollution, prescribe necessary terms or prohibit
the carrying out of any act in a ma nner to cause adverse impacts on the
environment .
(5) If it appears that the use of any substance, fuel, tool, machine or
equipment has caused or is likely to cause significant adverse impacts on the
environment, the Department may request the Ministry for necessary action.
(6) If a request is received from the Department pursuant to sub -section
(5), the Ministry may, in necessary consultation with the concerned body or other
stakeholders, prevent the use of such substance, fuel, tool , device or equip ment or
the production, import, sale, distribution or storage of such materials, and a notice
on such prevention shall be published in the Nepal Gazette.
(7) The Department shall, from time to time, carry out monitoring and
evaluation as to compliance with the standards determined pursuant to sub -section
(8) Other provisions relating to the control of pollution shall be as
prescribed.
16. Export and import of hazardous substance : (1) No hazardous substance of any
kind shall be imported into Nepal.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , any such
specific kind of hazardous substance that does not cause significant adverse
impacts on the human health and environment as specified by the Government of
Nepal by a notification in the Nepal Gazette may be impor ted.
(3) A producer of a hazardous substance or person or body established
under prevailing law may export hazardous substance by obtaining permission
from the Ministry.
(4) Grounds, criteria for issuance of, and other provisions relating to,
permission to export a hazardous substance pursuant to sub -section (3) shall be as
prescribed.
(5) A hazardous substance imported contrary to this Act shall be sent to
the same country from which it has been imported.
17. Manageme nt of a hazardous substance: (1) The person or body that produces a
hazardous substance shall be responsible for managing such a hazardous
substance.
(2) In collecting, storing, processing, selling, distributing, disposing or
transporting a hazardous sub stance, the concerned person or body shall make its
proper management in a manner not to cause adverse impacts on the environment.
(3) The concerned person or body shall manage the hazardous substance
pursuant to sub -section (1) at his or her own cost.
18. Power to establish laborator ies: (1) The Government of Nepal or Provincial
Government may establish laboratories , as required , to carry out test or
examination relative to environment protection and pollution control or prescribe
any laboratory recogniz ed by the Government of Nepal to carry out test or
examination relative to environment protection and pollution control.
(2) Provisions relating to the operation and management of the
laboratory established pursuant to sub -section (1) shall be as prescri bed.
19. To allow collection of samples: (1) If the concerned body intends to study, test,
examine or analyze the pollution or wastes to be or likely to be generated from
any industry, factory, mechanical equipment like a machine and motor vehicle, the
concerned owner or relevant person shall allow to collect samples of the pollution
or wastes generated from such industry, factory, mechanical equipment like a
machine and motor vehicle.
(2) Other provisions relating to the collection, study, examination , test
or analysis of samples pursuant to sub -section (1) shall be as prescribed.
20. Power to issue pollution control certificate: (1) The Ministry or Provincial
Ministry may provide a pollution control certificate, as prescribed, to any industry
that mak es a significant contribution to the control of pollution.
(2) Other provisions relating to the pollution control certificate shall be
as prescribed.
21. Environmental inspector: (1) The environmental inspector shall carry out
monitoring and inspection a s to whe ther or not acts to be performed in accordance
with the environmental study report approved pursuant to Section 7 have been
performed effectively and standards relating to pollution control and
environmental protection have been complied with.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), in cases
where the environmental inspector is not available, the following body may
designate the following officer or employee as the environmental inspector and
depute such officer or employee fo r monitoring and inspection:
(a) The Ministry may designate any officer employee of the
Government of Nepal or Provincial Government, as to whether or
not acts to be performed in accordance with the environmental study
report referred to in clause (a) of s ub-section (2) of Section 7 have
been performed effectively and standards relating to pollution
control and environmental protection have been complied with ,
(b) The Provincial Ministry may designate any officer employee of the
Provincial Government, as to whether or not acts to be performed in
accordance with the environmental study report referred to in clause
(b) of sub -section (2) of Section 3 approved pursuant to Section 7
or the environmental impact assessment report referred to in clause
(c) of sub -section (2) of Section 3 have been performed effectively
and standards relating to pollution control and environmental
protection have been complied with within its Province,
(c) The Local Level may designate any employee of the Local Level, as
to whether o r not acts to be performed in accordance with the
environmental study report referred to in clause (c) of sub -section
(2) of Section 3 approved pursuant to Section 7 have been performed
effectively and standards relating to pollution control and
environmen tal protection have been complied with within its Local
Level.
(3) Other provisions relating to the environmental inspector shall be as
prescribed.
22. Functions, duties and powers of the environmental inspector: (1) The
functions, duties and powers of the environmental inspector shall be as follows:
(a) To inspect as to whether or not disposal of hazardous
substances has been made or pollution has been caused
contrary to this Act or the rules framed under this Act,
(b) To inspect as to whether or not the acts of mitigation,
avoidance or control of pollution have been carried out in
accordance with this Act or the rules framed under this Act,
(c) To inspect on site as to whether or not work has been
performed consistent with the terms prescribed in the
approved environmental study report while executing the
proposal,
(d) To inspect as to where the matters prevented pursuant to

Section 13 or 15 have been complied with.
(2) In the course of making inspection pursuant to su b-section ( 1), the
environmental inspector may, by giving a prior notice to the concerned person,
body or proponent, inspect, examine or investigate any house, land, building,
factory, industry, motor vehicle, industrial device, tools, machinery, animal,
object, records, document or other goods or object .
(3) It shall be the duty of the concerned person, body or proponent to
render assistance to the environmental inspector in the course of inspection
pursuant to this Section, by providing such descriptions or information as
demanded by him or her.
(4) If the concerned person or body does not allow the environmental
inspector to make inspect ion, while moving on to make inspectio n pursuant to this
Section , does not provide such descriptions or information as demanded by him or
her, gives false descriptions, creates let and hinderance or does not assist in the
course of inspection, the environmental inspector may immediately impose the
fine as follows on such a person or body:
(a) A fine of up to twenty thousand rupees in case of disallowing him
or her to make inspection or creation of let and hindrance in
inspection,
(b) A fine of up to fifteen thousand rupees in case of failure to provide
such descriptions or information as demanded or of giving f alse
description in the course of inspection or failure to assist in
inspection.
(5) A party who is not satisfied with a punishment imposed by the
environmental inspector pursuant to sub -section ( 4) may make a complaint to the Director
General not later th an fifteen days of the date of receipt of information of that punishment.
(6) The environmental inspector shall submit a report of inquiry and inspection
carried out pursuant to this Section to the concerned body and the Department.
(7) Other functions, du ties and powers of the environmental inspector shall be
as prescribed.

Chapter -4
Provisions Relating to Climate Change
23. To provide information: (1) The Ministry shall carry out study as prescribed, on
a periodic basis, as to the adverse impacts caused by climate change on the local
communities, eco -system and bio -diversity and make public descriptions thereof.
(2) The Ministry shall, on the basis o f the study carried out pursuant to
sub-section (1), and from time to time, make public necessary information on such
measures as to be adopted for the mitigation of adverse impacts or risks from
climate change while formulating development projects to be executed by the
Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level.
(3) The Government of Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level
may, on the basis of the information made public pursuant to sub -section (2), set
the priorities of formulation of development projects.
24. Adaptation plan may be made: (1) In order to avoid adverse impacts and risks
of climate change, the Ministry, Provincial Ministry and Local Level may make
and implement an adaptation plan at the national, Provincial and Local levels,
respectively.
(2) In making the adaptation plac e referred to in sub -section (1), special
priority shall be accorded to the women, persons with disabilities, children, senior
citizens and economically indigent communities who are more vulnerable to
effects of climate change and the inhabitants of those geographical areas that have
become more vulnerable to climate change.
(3) Local communities may make and implement an adaptation plan at
the local level, and the concerned body shall make necessary assistance and
facilitation in the implementation of su ch a plan.
25. Power to carry out acts of mitigation: (1) The Government of Nepal may identify
areas emitting green -house gas and determine their national reference level.
(2) The Ministry shall make periodic monitoring as to the national
reference leve l determined pursuant to sub -section (1) and make public the
updated information.
(3) The Ministry, Provincial Government and Local Level may launch
necessary programs.
(4) The Ministry may make, or cause to be made, measurement of
green -house gas emis sion.
(5) Other provisions relating to mitigation shall be as prescribed.
26. Impacts from climate change and risk management: (1) The Government of
Nepal may, for the purpose of managing adverse impacts and risks of climate
change, issue necessary order s, by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, as to such
measures as to be adopted for the mitigation of adverse impacts and risks of
climate change, in the sectoral policies, strategies and action plans to be executed
by the Government of Nepal, Provincial G overnment, Local Level and other public
bodies as well as the private sector.
(2) The Government of Nepal may prescribe priority while issuing any
order pursuant to sub -section (1).
27. Power to determine technical standards: (1) The Government of Nepal may
determine and enforce necessary standards for the setting of priority of matters to
be implemented in urban and rural areas as to the mitigation of adverse impacts
and risks of climate change.
(2) The Government of Nepal may determine necessary polic y and
technical standards for the development of such technology as may be necessary
in the prescribed subject areas for the mitigation of adverse impacts and risks of
climate change.
28. Power to participate in carbon trade: (1) The Government of Nepal may
participate in carbon trade with the mechanisms established by the international
treaty, any foreign government or organization, business entity or private sector
for the mitigation and conservation of carbon emission.
(2) Other provisions relating to participation in carbon trade pursuant
to sub -section (1) and allocation of benefits resulted therefrom shall be as
prescribed.

Chapter -5
Provisions Relating to Protection of National Heritages and Environment
Protection Areas
29. Protection of national h eritages: (1) It shall be the duty of all the concerned
agency to protect national heritages.
(2) For the purpose of the protection of national heritages, the
concerned body shall to prepare and maintain an inventory, and such an inventory
shall also inclu de the objects or places within Nepal which are listed in the World
Heritage List.
(3) The objects, places, plants, animals, environment etc., included in
the inventory referred to in sub -section (2) shall be protected as prescribed.
30. Special provision relating to environment protection areas: (1) The
Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Provincial Government and
concerned Local Level and by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, maintain as an
environment protection area any place c ontaining a natural heritage or aesthetic
place which is considered extremely significant from the point of view of
environmental protection or any place of historical or cultural importance .
(2) In making any road, building, river management or other ph ysical
infrastructures, the Government of Nepal may, in coordination with the concerned
body and by a notification in the Nepal Gazette, specify any specific area as an
open or green area with a view to protecting the environment of such area.
(3) Prohib ition may be imposed on any such act as prescribed within
the environment protection area maintained pursuant to sub -section (1) or open or
green area specified pursuant to sub -section (2) .
(4) In cases where it appears that adverse impacts have been cau sed, are
likely to be caused, on public health or environment of any specific area or place
as a result of excessive environmental pollution, soil erosion, excessive
exploitation of natural heritages or occurrence of a natural calamity in such area
or plac e, the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the concerned Local
Level, issue any appropriate order for the balance, management or restoration of
the environment, upon specifying such an area or place as a sensitive area from
the environmental view point.
(5) The Government of Nepal may specify any place in which any
injurious or hazardous substance or wastes are stored or disposed or there is
excessive pollution for other reason as a polluted area and prevent the movement
of public there.
(6) In cases where there is improvement from the environmental
viewpoint in the place referred to in sub -section (4) or (5), such area may be
removed from the list of sensitive area or polluted area.
(7) Participation of the local community maybe forged in t he
management of any area maintained or specified pursuant to this Section for the
protection of environment.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Section and Section 36, “local
community” means the community residing within or in neighborhood of such a n
area.
(8) There shall be participation of the local community as prescribed
in the benefits resulted from the management of the area managed pursuant to sub -
section (7).
31. Establishment and operation of fund : (1) There shall be established a fund
entitled the environment protection fund, for the protection of environment,
prevention and control of pollution, management of climate change and protection
of the national heritages.
(2) The following amounts shall be credited to the fund referred to in
sub-section (1):
(a) Amount received from the Government of Nepal, Provincial
Government or Local Level,
(b) Amount received from any native person or organization,
(c) Amount received from any foreign government or international
organization.
(3) Prior to obtaining the amount referred to in clause (c) of sub -section
(2), approval of the Government of Nepal, Ministry of Finance shall be obtained.
(4) The fund shall be audited by the Auditor General.
(5) The operation of the fund shall be as prescribed.
32. Power to constitute council : (1) There shall be an environmental protection and
climate change management national council chaired by the Prime Minister, for
the carrying out of acts relating to environmental protection and climate change at
the national level in an effective manner.
(2) The council referred to in sub -section (1) shall consist of the
following chairperson and members:
(a) Prime Minister -Chairperson
(b) Minster for Forest and Environment,
Government of Nepal -Member
(c) Three Minsters of the Government of Nepal
designated by the Prime Minister -Member
(d) Chief Ministers of all Provinces -Minister
(e) Member of the National Planning Commission
who looks af ter the matter of environment -Member
(f) Two pe rsons including one woman nominated by
the Chairperson from among the professors
in fore st and environmental science -Member
(g) Three persons including two women nominated by the
Chairperson from among the persons with expertise
in the fi eld of forest and environment -Member
(h) Secretary, Ministry -Member -Secretary
(3) The chairperson may designate one Minister out of the members as
the vice -chairperson.
(4) The tenure of the members nominated pursuant to clauses (f) and (g)
shall be three years.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (4), if a
nominated member fails perform the duties of his or her office, the chairperson
may remove him or her from the office of member.
Provided that, prior to such removal, he or she shall be provided with a
reasonable opportunity to submit clarification.
33. Meetings and of the Council: (1) The Council shall meet at least once a year at
such date, time and place as prescribed by the chairperson.
(2) The member -secretary of the Counci l shall, in consultation with the
chairperson send a notice setting out the date, time and place of the meeting of the
Council, along with the agenda to be deliberated thereat, so that all the members
can receive it in advance of at least forty -eight hours of the time of the meeting.
Provided that in the event of a need for calling a meeting of the Council
immediately, the chairperson of the Council may call the meeting in advance of
seventy -two hours, if the meeting is so called, the member -secretary of the
Council shall as soon as possible send the notice thereof so that all the members
can receive it.
(3) The presence of a majority of the total number of members shall be
deemed to constitute a quorum for the meeting of the Council.
(4) The chairperson of the Council shall preside over the meeting of the
Council, and in the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson of the Council
shall preside over the meeting.
(5) Any decision of the Council shall be taken by a majority, and in the
case of a tie , the chairperson shall exercise the casting vote.
(6) Any office -bearer, representative of concerned body or
organization or environmental expert may, as required, be invited to the meeting
of the Council.
(7) The member -secretary of the Counc il shall authenticate the decision
of the Council .
(8) Other procedures relating to the meeting of the Council shall be as
determined by the Council itself.
34. Functions, duties and powers of the Council: (1) The functions, duties and
powers of the Counc il shall be as follows:
(a) To give direction, as required, to the Ministry and other bodies to
keep on integrating the matters relating to the environment and
climate change into the long -term policies, plans and programs,
(b) To set policy for the develo pment of a national system for the
control of pollution, management of wastes and protection of
national heritages ,
(c) To give necessary policy guidance to the Provincial and Local levels
with regard to environment al protection and climate change,
(d) To manage economic resources for environmental protection and
climate change and facilitate for the same,
(e) To give guidance to the Ministry for utilization, management,
development and protection of natural, cultural and physical
resources and heritages,
(f) To make evaluation of acts pertaining to environmental protection
and climate change.

Chapter -6
Fine and Compensation
35. Fine: (1) If any person does the following act, the concerned body may punish
that person as follows:
(a) A fine not exceeding five hundred thousand rupees if, in the case of
a proposal of which the brief environmental study report has to be
approved, the proposal is executed without having it approved or if
any proposal is executed in a manner inconsistent with the approved
repor t,
(b) A fine not exceeding one million rupees if any proposal is executed
without having the initial environmental examination approved or
in a manner inconsistent with the approved report,
(c) A fine not exceeding five million rupees if, in the case of a proposal
of which the environmental impact assessment report has to be
approved, the proposal is executed without having it approved or if
any proposal is executed in a manner inconsistent with the approved
report.
(2) If any person does any act referred to in sub -section (1), the
concerned body may give order to stop such act immediately and have the
environmental study report approved pursuant to this Act where such report has
not been got approved, and to improve the act if acted inconsistent with such a
report, and it shall be the duty of the concerned person or body to do as per the
order so given. The concerned body may impose a fine that is three -fold of the
fine imposed pursuant to sub -section (1) if the order so given is not complied with.
(3) If any person does any act inconsistent with this Act or the rules,
guidelines, procedures or norms framed under this Act, other than that set forth in
sub-section (1), the concerned body may restrict the doing of such act and punish
that person with a fin e not exceeding three hundred thousand rupees and give order
to do the act referred to in this Act or the rules, guidelines, procedures or norms
framed under this Act. A fine that is three -fold of the fine imposed pursuant to this
sub-section if the order so given is not complied with.
(4) If the act referred to in the order given pursuant to sub -section (2)
or (3) is not done, such act shall be restricted and the concerned body shall send a
request, accompanied by the recommendation, to take necessary acti on for
blacklisting such a person or body.
(5) If so recommended pursuant to sub -section (4), the Department
shall, if it finds the content reasonable, blacklist such a person or body for a period
of one year to five years.
(6) Notwithstanding anything con tained in sub -sections (4) and (5), the
Department shall make necessary inquiry into non -compliance with the order
given by it and take action referred to in sub -section (5).
(7) If a body is blacklisted pursuant to sub -section (5), such a person or
body m ay not submit any proposal in that body’s name or in any name whatever
associated with such a person or body for the period of blacklisting.
(8) Prior to imposing the fine referred to in this Section, a reasonable
opportunity shall be given to the person o r body or project which is to be
blacklisted.
36. Application may be made: (1) If a person execute s, in contravention of this Act,
a proposal w ithout having the initial environmental examination, brief
environmental study or environmental impact assessment report approved or in a
manner inconsistent with the approved report or does or proceeds to do any act
contrary to this Act, application may be made to the concerned body or authority.
(2) If any person, body or local community suffers any loss or damage
as a result of the pollution or disposal of a hazardous waste by another person
inconsistent with this Act or the rules, guidelines or standards framed under this
Act, the person, body or local community victimized from such an act may make
an appli cation to the concerned body for getting compensation for the injury
caused to such person , body or community.
(3) If, in examining and inquiring into the application made pursuant
to sub -section (1) or (2) , it is proved that the applicant has sustained l oss or
damage, the concerned body shall ascertain the injury and require a reasonable
compensation to be paid by the person, body or proponent who has caused such
loss or damage to the victim person, body or local community.
(4) There shall be formed a com mittee comprising three experts
nominated by the Government of Nepal to make inquiry into any application made
as to the injury caused from pollution made by any body of the Government of
Nepal or body owned and controlled by the Government of Nepal, and
compensation shall be paid pursuant to sub -section (3) on the basis of
recommendation by that committee.
(5) There shall be formed a committee comprising three experts
nominated by the Provincial Government to make inquiry into any application
made as to the injury caused from pollution made by any body of the Provincial
Government or Local Level or body owned and controlled by the Provincial
Government or Local Level, and compensation shall be paid pursuant to sub -
section (3) on the basis of recommendation by that committee.
(6) The basis for determining compensation pursuant to this Section and
other provisions shall be as prescribed.
37. Appeal: (1) A party who is not satisfied with the fine imposed pursuant to Section
35 may make an appeal within thirty -five days to the concerned District Court if
such fine is imposed by the Local Level and to the concerned High Court if it is
imposed by other b ody or authority of the Government of Nepal or Provincial
Government.
(2) A party who is not satisfied with the decision made as to the
determination of compensation pursuant to Section 36 may make an appeal to the
concerned High Court within thirty -five days.

Chapter -7
Miscellaneous
38. Environment protection plan to be formulated: (1) The Government of Nepal
may formulate and implement an environment protection plan with a view to
maintaining a clean and healthy environment, and conserving and promoting the
same.
(2) The Provincial Government and Local Level may, subject to the
plan referred to in sub -section ( 1), make and implement necessary plans for
environmental protection.
(3) In formulating the plans referred to in sub -sections (1) and (2),
traditional and local practices on the protection, conservation, sustainable use of
the environment and equitable d istribution of fruits received from the use of
environmental resources shall be included in the plans.
(4) The plan referred to in sub -section (1) shall include such other
matters as prescribed.
39. Monitoring and inspection to be carried out: (1) The Ministry or Department
may carry out monitoring and inspection as to whether or not this Act or the rules,
guidelines, procedures or standards framed under this Act have been implemented.
(2) The Provincial Government or Local Level may, with a view to
protecting and conserving the environment within its area, carry out monitoring
and inspection as to whether or not this Act or the rules, guidelines, procedures or
standards framed under this Act have been implemented.
(3) Other provisions relating to monit oring and inspection to be carried
out pursuant to s ub-section (1) or (2) shall be as prescribe d.
40. Annual report to be prepared: (1) The Ministry shall each year prepare an annual
report including the following matters:
(a) Description obtained from the monitoring and inspection carried out
pursuant to Section 39,
(b) Description relating to national and international activities on
climate change,
(c) Other necessary description.
(2) The Ministry shall submit the annual report referred to in sub -
section (1) to the Council within two months of the date of expiry of each fiscal
year.
41. Power to issue order: (1) The Government of Nepal may, by a notification in the
Nepal Gazette, issue necessary order as to the matters requiring precautions from
the point of view of environmental protection.
(2) The Director General may impose a fine not exceeding one hundred
thousand rupees on a person or body that violates the order issued pursuant to sub -
section (1).
42. Delegation of power: The Ministry may, as per necessity, delegate any of the
powers conferred on it pursuant to this Act to the Department, environmental
inspector or any office employee or any body .
43. Prevail ing law to govern : The matters set forth in this Act shall be g overned by
this Act, and other matters shall be governed by the prevailing law.
44. Power to frame rules: The Government of Nepal may frame necessary rules for
implementing this Act.
45. Power to frame guidelines , procedures and standards : The Government of
Nepal may, without prejudice to this Act and the rules framed under this Act ,
frame and enforce necessary guidelines , procedures and standards.
46. Assessment as to implementation of the Act: (1) The Ministry shall make
assessment of impacts of the impl ementation of the Act.
47. Repeal and saving: (1) The Environment Protection Act, 1997 (2053) is hereby
repealed.
(2) The acts and actions performed under the Environment Protection
Act, 1997 (2053) shall be deemed to have been performed under this Act.
(3) If any application or complaint is under consideration by any body
or authority pursuant to the Environment Protection Act, 1997 (2053), such
application or complaint shall be settled in accordance with that Act .